
BV4501.M8 A28 1897 
Murray, Andrew, 1828-1917 
Absolute surrender : and 
other addresses. 



ANDREW MURRAY'S BOOKS. 



AUTHOR^S EDITIONS. 

Abide in Christ. Thoughts on the Blessed Life of Fel- 
lowship with the Son of God. 16ino, pa., 2Sc; clo., 50; 12mo., 

clo.,$1.00. 

Like Christ. Thoughts on the Blessed Life of Con- 
formity to the Son of God. 16rao, pa., net 25c.; clo., 50c.; 
12mo, clo., $1.00. 

"With Christ in the School of Prayer. Thoughts on 
our Training- for the Miuistrv of Intercession. 16mo., pa., 
net 25c.; clo., 50c. ; 12mo., clo., $1.00. 

Holy in Christ. Thoughts on the Calling of God's 
Children to be Holy as he is Holy. 16mo, pa., net 25c.; clo., 
50c. ; 12mo., clo., $1.00. 

The Spirit of Christ. Thoughts on the Indwelling of 
the Holy Spirit in the Believer and the Church. 16mo, pa., 
net 25c.; clo., 50c.; 12mo, clo., $1.00. 

The Master's Indwelling; Northfield Addresses. 16mo, 

pa., net 25c.; clo., 50c.: 12mo, clo., 75c. 

The New Life. Words of God for Young Disciples of 
Chribt. 12mo, clo., $1.00. 

The Children for Christ. 12mo, clo., ^1.00. 

The Holiest of AH. An exposition of the epistle to the 
Hebrews. Svo., clo., net, $2.00. 

The Power of the Spirit, and other selections from the 
writings of William L,aw. With introduction. 12mo, clo., $1.00. 

The Deeper Christian Life. An aid to its attainment. 

ISmc, clo., 50c. 

^^ Within/' or the Kingdom of God is Within You. 

16mo.,50c. 

Waiting on God. Daily Messages for a month. 16mo, 

clo., 50c. 

Have Mercy Upon Us. The Prayer of the Penitent in 
the fifty-fifth Psalm explained and applied. Clo., 75c. 

Be Perfect. Message from the Father in Heaven to 
His Children on Earth. Meditations for a month. 18mo, 

clo., 50c. 

Htimility. The Beauty of Holiness. 18mo, clo., SOc. 

Let Us Draw Nigh I The Way to a Life Abiding Con- 
tinually in the Secret of God's Presence. 18mo, clo., SOc. 

Why Do You Not Believe ? Words of instruction and 
encouragement for all seeking- the Lord. 18mo, clo., 50c. 

Jesus Himself. With portrait of author. 18mo, clo.,35c. 
Love Made Perfect. 18mo, clo., 35c. 

Fleming H. Revell Company, Publishers. 



Absolute Surrender 

AND OTHER ADDRESSES 



BY 
ANDREW MURRAY 



"/ am Thine, and all that I have."' i Kings xx, 4. 



FLEMING H. REVELL COMPANY, 
New York. Chicago. Toronto. 

Publishers of Evangelical Literature. 



CONTENTS. 



PAGE 

Absolute Surrender 5 

"The Fruit of the Spirit is Love" . . 19 

Separated unto the Holy Ghost . . 37 

Peter's Repentance . . . . .49 

Impossible with Man; Possible with God 58 

" O Wretched Man that I am ! " . . .69 

" Having Begun in the Spirit " . . 79 

Kept by the Power of God . . . .92 

"Ye are the Branches" .... 109 



Copyrighted 1897, by FLEMING H. REVELL COMPANY. 



ABSOLUTE SURRENDER. 

''And Ben-'hadad the king of Syria gathered all 
his host together: and there were thirty and two 
kings with him, and horses, and chariots: and he 
went up and besieged Samaria, and warred against it. 
And he sent messengers to Ahab king of Israel into 
the qity, and said unto him, Thus saith Ben hadad, 
Thy silver and thy gold is mine; thy wives also and 
thy children, even the goodliest, are mine. And the 
king of Israel answered and said. My lord, O king, 
according to thy saying, I am thine and all that I 
have."— i Kings 20:1-4. 

What Ben hadad asked was absolute surrender; 
and what Ahab gave was what was asked of him — 
ahsolide surrender. I want to use these words: 
"My lord, O king, according to thy saying, I am 
thine, and all that I have," as the words of absolute 
surrender with which every child of God ought to 
yield himself to his Father. We have heard it before, 
but we need to hear it very definitely— the condition 
of God's blessing is absolute surrender of all into 
His hands. Praise God! if our hearts are willing for 
that, there is no end to what God will do for us, and 
to the blessing God will bestow. 

Absolute sm^render — let me tell you where I got 
those words. I used them myself often, and you have 
heard them numberless times. But in Scotland once I 
was in a company where we were talking about the 
condition of Christ's Church, and what the great 

5 



ABSOLUTE SURRENDER 



need of the Church and of believers is; and there 
was in our company a godly worker who has much to 
do in training workers, and I asked him what he 
would say was the great need of the Church, and the 
message that ought to be preached. He answered 
very quietly and simply and determinedly: 

" Absolute surrender to God is the one tiling.''^ 

The words struck me as never before. And that 
man began to tell how, in the workers with whom 
he had to deal, he finds that if they are sound on 
that point, even though they be backward, they are 
willing to be taught and helped, and they always im- 
prove; whereas others who are not sound there very 
often go back and leave the work. The condition 
for obtaining God's full blessing is absolute surrender 
to Him. 

And now, I desire by God's grace to give to you this 
message — that your God in heaven answers the 
prayers which you have offered for blessing on your- 
selves and for blessing on those around you by this 
one demand: Are you iciUing to surrender yourselves 
absolutely into His hands? What is our answer to 
be? God knows there are hundreds of hearts who 
have said it, and there are hundreds more who long 
to say it but hardly dare to do so. And there are 
hearts who have said it, but who have yet miserably 
failed, and who feel themselves condemned because 
they did not find the secret of the power to live that 
life. May God have a word for all! 

Let me say, first of all, 

GOD CLAIMS IT FROM US. 

Yes, it has its foundation in the very nature of God. 



ABSOLUTE SURRENDER 



God cannot do otherwise. Who is God? He is the 
Fountain of life, the only Source of existence and 
power and goodness, and throughout the universe 
there is nothing good but what God works. God has 
created the sun, and the moon, and the stars, and the 
flowers, and the trees, and the grass; and are they 
not all absolutely surrendered to God? Do they not 
allow Gc)d to work in them just what He pleases? 
When God clothes the lily with its beauty, is it not 
yielded up, surrendered, given over to God as He 
works in it its beauty ? And God's redeemed children, 
oh, can you think that God can work His work if 
there is only half or a part of them surrendered? 
God cannot do it. God is life, and love, and blessing, 
and power, and infinite beauty, and God delights to 
communicate Himself to every child who is prepared 
to receive Him; but ah! this one want of absolute 
surrender is just the thing that hinders God. And 
now He comes, and as God He claims it. 

You know in daily life what absolute surrender is. 
You know that everything has to be given up to its 
special, definite object and service. I have a pen in 
my pocket, and that pen is absolutely surrendered to 
the one work of writing, and that pen must be ab- 
solutely surrendered to my hand if I am to write 
properly vv^ith it. If another holds it partly, I can- 
not write properly. This coat is absolutely given up 
to me to cover my body. This building is entirely 
given up to religious services. And now, do you ex- 
pect that in your immortal being, in the divine 
nature that you have received by regeneration, God 
can work His work, every day and every hour, unless 
you are entirely given up to Him? God cannot. 



ABSOLUTE SURRENDER 



The temple of Solomon was absolutely surrendered to 
God when it was dedicated to Him. And every- 
one of us is a temple of God, in which God will dwell 
and work mightily on one condition — absolute sur- 
render to Him. God claims it, God is worthy of it, 
and without it God cannot work His blessed work in 
us. 

But secondly, God not only claims it, but 

GOD WILL WOEK IT HIMSELF. 

I am sure there is many a heart that says: "Ah, but 
that absolute surrender implies so much!" Some- 
one says: " Oh, I have passed through so much trial 
and suffering, and there is so much of the self-life 
still remaining, and I dare not face the entire giving 
of it up, because I know it will cause so much trouble 
and agony." 

Alas! alas ! that God's children have such thoughts 
of Him, such cruel thoughts. Oh, I come to you 
with a message, fearful and anxious one. God does 
not ask you to give the perfect surrender in your 
strength, or by the power of your will; God is will- 
ing to work it in you. Do we not read: "It is God 
that worketh in us, both to will and to do of His 
good pleasure " ? And that is what we should seek 
for — to go on our faces before God, until our hearts 
learn to believe that the everlasting God Himself 
will come in to turn out what is wrong, to conquer 
what is evil, and to work what is well-pleasing in His 
blessed sight. God Himself will work it in you. 

Look at the men in the Old Testament, like 
Abraham. Do you think it was by accident that God 
found that man, the father of the Faithful and the 



ABSOLUTE SURRENDER 



"f^riend of God, and that it was Abraham himself, apart 
from God, who had such faith and such obedience 
and such devotion? You know it is not so> God 
raised him up and prepared him as an instrument for 
His glory. 

Did not God say to Pharaoh: " For this cause have 
I raised thee up, for to show in thee my power"? 

And if God said that of him, will not God say it 
far more of every child of His? 

Oh, I want to encourage you, and I want you to 
cast away every fear. Come with that feeble desire; 
and if there is the fear which says: "Oh, my 
desire is not strong enough, I am not willing 
for everything that may come, I do not feel bold 
enough to say I can conquer everything" — I pray 
you, learn to know and trust your God now. Say: 
" My God, I am willing that Thou shouldst make me 
willing." If there is anything holding you back, or 
any sacrifice you are afraid of making, come to God 
now, and prove how gracious your God is, and be 
not afraid that He will command from you what He 
will not bestow. 

God comes and offers to work this absolute sur- 
render in you. All these searchings and hungerings 
and longings that are in your heart, I tell you they 
are the drawings of the divine magnet, Christ Jesus. 
He lived a life of absolute surrender, He has got 
possession of you. He is living in your heart by His 
Holy Spirit. You have hindered and hindered Him 
terribly, but He desires to help you to get hold of 
Him entirely. And He comes and draws you now by 
His message and words. Will you not come and 
trust Gjd to work in you that absolute surrender to 



10 ABSOLUTE SURRENDER 

Himself? Yes, blessed be God, He can do it and He 
will do it. 

The third thought. God not only claims it and 
works it, but 

GOD ACCEPTS IT WHEN WE BEING IT TO HIM. 

God works it in the secret of our heart, God urges us 
by the hidden power of His Holy Spirit to come and 
speak it out, and we have to bring and to yield to 
Him that absolute surrender. But remember, when 
you come and bring God that absolute surrender, it 
may, as far as your feelings or your consciousness go, 
be a thing of great imperfection, and you may doubt 
and hesitate and say: 

*'Isit absolute?" 

But, oh, remember there was once a man to whom 
Christ had said: 

" If thou canst believe, all things are possible to 
him that believeth." 

And his heart was afraid, and he cried out: 

" Lord, I believe, help Thou mine unbelief." 

That was a faith that triumphed over the devil, 
and the evil spirit was cast out. And if you come 
and say: "Lord, I yield myself in absolute surrender 
to my God," even though it be with a trembling 
heart and with the consciousness: " I do not feel the 
power, I do not feel the determination, I do not feel 
the assurance," it will succeed. Be not afraid, but 
come just as you are, and even in the midst of your 
trembling the power of the Holy Ghost will work. 

Have you never yet learned the lesson that the 
Holy Ghost works with mighty power while on the 



ABSOLUTE SURRENDER 11 

human side everything appears feeble? Look at the 
Lord Jesus Christ in Gethsemane. We read that 
He, " through the Eternal Spirit," offered Himself 
a sacrifice unto God. The Almighty Spirit of God 
was enabling Him to do it. And yet what agony 
and fear and exceeding sorrow came over Him, and 
how He prayed! Externally you can see no sign of 
the mighty power of the Spirit, but the Spirit of God 
was there. And even so, while you are feeble and 
fighting and trembling, in faith in the hidden work 
of God's Spirit do not fear, but yield yourself. 

And when you do yield yourself in absolute sur- 
render, let it be in the faith that God does now 
accept of it. That is the great point, and that is 
what we so often miss: — that believers should be 
thus occupied with God in this matter of surren- 
der. I pray you, be occupied with God. We want 
to get help, every one of us, so that in our daily 
life God shall be clearer to us, God shall have 
the right place, and be " all in all." And if we are 
to have that through life, let us begin now and look 
away from ourselves, and look up to God. Let each 
believe, — while I, a poor worm on earth and a trem- 
bling child of God, full of failure and sin and fear, 
bow here, and no one knows what passes through my 
heart, and while I in simplicity say, O God, I accept 
Thy terms; I have pleaded for blessing on myself 
and others, I have accepted Thy terms of absolute 
surrender — while your heart says that in deep si- 
lence, remember there is a God present that takes 
note of it, and writes it down in His book, and there 
is a God present who at that very moment takes pos- 



12 ABSOLUTE SURRENDER 

session of you. You may not feel it, you may not 
realize it, but God takes possession if you will trust 
Him. 

A fourth thought. God not only claims it, and 
works it, and accepts it when I bring it, but 

GOD MAINTAINS IT. 

That is the great difficulty with many. People 
say: "I have often been stirred at a meeting, or at 
a convention, and I have consecrated myself to God, 
but it has passed away. I know it may last for a 
week or for a month, but away it fades, and after a 
time it is all gone." 

But listen! It is because you do not believe what I 
am now going to tell you and remind you of. When 
God has begun the work of absolute surrender in 
you, and when God has accepted your surrender, then 
God holds Himself bound to care for it and to keep 
it. Will you believe that? 

In this matter of surrender there are two, God and 
I — I a worm, God the everlasting and omnipotent 
Jehovah. Worm, will you be afraid to trust your- 
self to this mighty God now? God is willing. Do 
you not believe that He can keep you continually, 
day by day, and moment by moment? 

Moment by moment I'm kept in His love; 
Moment by moment I've life from above. 

If God allows the sun to shine upon you moment 
by moment, without intermission, will not God let 
His life shine upon you every moment? And why 
have you not experienced it? Because you have not 
trusted God for it, and you do not surrender yourself 
absolutely to God in that trust. 



ABSOLUTE SURRENDER 13 

A life of absolute surrender has its difficulties. I 
do not deny that. Yea, it has something far more 
than difficulties; it is a life that with men is abso- 
lutely impossible. But by the grace of God, by the 
power of God, by the power of the Holy Spirit dwell- 
ing in us, jt is a life to which we are destined, and a 
life that is possible for us, praise God! Let us be- 
lieve that God will maintain it. 

Some of you read recently the words of that aged 
saint who, on his ninetieth birthday, told of all God's 
goodness to him — I mean George Mtiller. What did 
he say he believed to be the secret of his hapxjiness, 
and of all the blessing with which God had visited 
him? He said he believed there were two reasons. 
The one was that he had been enabled by grace to 
maintain a good conscience before God day by day; 
the other was, that he was a lover of God's Word. 
Ah, yes, a good conscience in unfeigned obedience to 
God day by day, and fellowship with God every day 
in His Word, and prayer — that is a life of absolute 
surrender. 

Such a life has two sides — on the one side, abso- 
lute surrender to work what God wants you to do; 
on the other side, to let God work what He wants 
to do. 

First, to do what God wants you to do. 

Give up yourselves absolutely to the will of God. 
You know something of that will; not enough, far 
from all. But say absolutely to the Lord God: " By 
Thy grace I desire to do Thy will in everything, 
every moment of every day." Say: " Lord God, not 
a word upon my tongue but for Thy glory, not a 
movement of my temper but for Thy glory, not an 



14 ABSOLUTE SURRENDER 

affection of love or hate in my heart but for Thy 
glory, and according to Thy blessed will." 

Someone says: "Do you think that possible?" 

I ask, What has God promised you, and what can 
God do to fill a vessel absolutely surrendered to Him? 
Oh, God wants to bless you in a way beyond what 
you expect. From the beginning ear hath not heard, 
neither hath the eye seen, what God hath prepared 
for them that wait for Him. God has prepared 
unheard-of things you never can think of; bless- 
ings much more wonderful than you can imagine, 
more mighty than you can conceive. They are di- 
vine blessings. Oh, say now: 

" I give myself absolutely to God, to His will, to do 
only what God wants." 

It is God who will enable you to carry out the sur- 
render. 

And, on the other side, come and say: *' I give my- 
self absolutely to God, to let Him work in me to will 
and to do of His good pleasure, as He has promised 
to do." 

Yes, the living God wants to work in His children 
in a way that we cannot understand, but that God's 
Word has revealed, and He wants to work in us every 
moment of the day. God is willing to maintain our 
life. Only let our absolute surrender be one of sim- 
ple, childlike, and unbounded trust. 

The last thought. This absolute surrender to God 

WILL WONDERFULLY BLESS US. 

What Ahab said to his enemy. King Ben=hadad, — 
" My lord, O king, according to thy word I am thine, 
and all that I have " — shall we not say to our God 



ABSOLUTE SURRENDER 15 

and loving Father? If we do say it, God's blessing 
will come upon us. God wants us to be separate 
from the world; we are called to come out from the 
world that hates God. Come out for God, and say: 
"Lord, anything for Thee." If you say that with 
prayer, and speak that into God's ear, He will accept 
it, and He will teach you what it means. 

I say again, God will bless you. You have been 
praying for blessing. But do remember, there must 
be absolute surrender. At every tea=table you see it. 
Why is tea poured into that cup? Because it is 
empty, and given up for the tea. But put ink, or 
vinegar, or wine into it, and will they pour the tea 
into the vessel? And can God fill you, can God bless 
you if you are not absolutely surrendered to Him? 
He cannot. Let us believe God has wonderful bless- 
ings for us, if we will but stand up for God, and say, 
be it with a trembling will, yet with a believing 
heart: 

" O God, I accept Thy demands. I am thine and 
all that I have. Absolute surrender is what my soul 
yields to Thee by divine grace." 

You may not have such strong and clear feelings 
of deliverance as you would desire to have, but hum- 
ble yourselves in His sight, and acknowledge that 
you have grieved the Holy Spirit by your self-will, 
self=confidence, and self^elBPort. Bow humbly before 
Him in the confession of that, and ask him to break 
the heart and to bring you into the dust before Him. 
Then, as you bow before Him, just accept God's 
teaching that in your flesh " there dwelleth no good 
thing," and that nothing will help you except an- 
other life which must come in. You must deny self 



16 ABSOLUTE SURRENDER 

once for all. Denying self must every moment be 
the power of your life, and then Christ will come in 
and take possession of you. 

When was Peter delivered? When was the change 
accomplished? The change began with Peter weep- 
ing, and the Holy Ghost came down and filled his 
heart. 

God the Father loves to give us the power of the 
Spirit. We have the Spirit of God dwelling within 
us. We come to God confessing that, and praising 
God for it; and yet confessing how we have grieved 
the Spirit. And then we bow our knees to the 
Father to ask that He would strengthen us with all 
might by the Spirit in the inner man, and that He 
would fill us with His mighty power. And as the 
Spirit reveals Christ to us, Christ comes to live in 
our hearts for ever, and the self4ife is cast out. 

Let us bow before God in humiliation, and in that 
humiliation confess before Him the state of the 
whole Church. No words can tell the sad state of 
the Church of Christ on earth. I wish I had words 
to speak what I sometimes feel about it. Just think 
of the Christians around you. I do not speak of 
nominal Christians, or of professing Christians, but 
I speak of hundreds and thousands of honest, ear- 
nest Christians who are not living a life in the 
power of God or to His glory. So little power, so 
little devotion or consecration to God, so little con- 
ception of the truth that a Christian is a man utter- 
ly surrendered to God's will! Oh, we want to con- 
fess the sins of God's people around us, and to hum- 
ble ourselves. We are members of that sickly body, 
and the sickliness of the body will hinder us, and 



ABSOLUTE SURRENDER 17 

break us down, unless we come to God, and in con- 
fession separate ourselves from partnership with 
worldliness, with coldness towards each other, unless 
we give up ourselves to be entirely and wholly for 
God. 

How much Christian work is being done in the 
spirit of the flesh, and in the power of self! How 
much work, day by day, in which human energy — 
our will and our thoughts about the work — is contin- 
ually manifested, and in which there is but little of 
waiting upon God, and upon the power of the Holy 
Ghost! Let us make confession. But as we confess 
the state of the Church and the feebleness and sin- 
fulness of work for God among us, let us come back 
to ourselves. Who is there who truly longs to be 
delivered from the power of the self4ife, who truly 
acknowledges that it is the power of self and the flesh, 
and who is willing to cast all at the feet of Christ? 
There is deliverance. 

I heard of one who had been an earnest Christian, 
and who spoke about the " cruel " thought of separa- 
tion and death. But you do not think that, do you? 
What are we to think of separation and death? 
This: — Death was the path to glory for Christ. For 
the joy set before Him He endured the cross. The 
cross was the birthplace of His everlasting glory. 
Do you love Christ? Do you long to be in Christ, 
and not like Him? Let death be to you the most 
desirable thing on earth ; death to self, and fellowship 
with Christ. Separation — do you think it a hard 
thing to be called to be entirely free from the world, 
and by that separation to be united to God and His 
love, by separation to become prepared for living and 



18 ABSOLUTE SURRENDER 

walking with God every day? Surely one ought to 
say: 

"Anything to bring me to separation, to death, for 
a life of full fellowship with God and Christ." 

Oh! come and cast this self -life and flesh-life at 
the feet of Jesns. Then trust Him. Do not worry 
yourselves with trying to understand all about it, but 
come in the living faith that Christ will come into 
you with the power of His death and the power of 
His life; and then the Holy Spirit will bring the 
whole Christ — Christ crucified and Christ risen and 
living in glory — into your heart. 



"THE FRUIT OF THE SPIRIT IS LOVE." 

I want to look at the fact of a life filled with the 
Holy Spirit more from the practical side, and to show 
how this life will show itself in our daily walk and 
conduct. 

Under the Old Testament you know the Holy 
Spirit often came upon men as a Divine Spirit of 
revelation, to reveal the mysteries of God, or for 
power to do the work of God. But He did not then 
dwell in them. Now, many just want the Old Testa- 
ment gift of power for work, but know very little of 
the New Testament gift of the indwelling Spirit, ani- 
mating and renewing the whole life. When God 
gives the Holy Spirit, His great object is the forma- 
tion of a holy character. It is a gift of a holy 
mind and spiritual disposition, and what we need 
above everything else, is to say: 

"I must have the Holy Spirit sanctifying my 
whole inner life if I am really to live for God's 
glory." 

You might say that when Christ promised the 
Spirit to the disciples He did so that they might 
have power to be witnesses. True, but then they re- 
ceived the Holy Ghost in such heavenly power and 
reality that He took possession of their whole being 
at once and so fitted them as holy men for doing the 
work with power as they had to do it. Christ spoke 
of power to the disciples, but it was the Spirit filling 
their whole being that worked the power. 

19 



20 ''THE FRUIT OF THE SPIRIT IS LOVE'' 

I wish now to dwell upon the passage found in 
Gal. 5 : 22: 

" The fruit of the Spirit is love." 

We read that "Love is the fulfilling of the law," 
and my desire is to speak on love as a fruit of the 
Spirit with a twofold object. One is that this word 
may be a searchlight in our hearts, and give us a test 
by which to try all our thoughts about the Holy 
Spirit and all our experience of the holy life. Let us 
try ourselves by this word. Has this been our daily 
habit, to seek the being filled with the Holy Spirit as 
the Spirit of love? " The fruit of the Spirit is love." 
Has it been our experience that the more we have of 
the Holy Spirit the more loving we become? In 
claiming the Holy Spirit we should make this the 
first object of our expectation. The Holy Spirit 
comes as a Spirit of love. 

Oh, if this were true in the church of Christ how 
different her state would be! May God help us to 
get hold of this simple heavenly truth, that the fruit 
of the Spirit is a love which appears in the life, and 
that just as the Holy Spirit gets real possession of 
the life, the heart will be filled wnth real, divine, uni- 
versal love. 

One of the great causes why God cannot bless His 
Church is the luant of love. When the body is di- 
vided, there cannot be strength. In the time of their 
great religious wars, when Holland stood out so no- 
bly against Spain, one of their mottoes was: " Unity 
gives strength." It is only when God's people stand 
as one body, one before God in the fellowship of love, 
one towards another in deep affection, one before the 
world in a love that the world can see — it is only then 



''THE FRUIT OF THE SPIRIT IS LOVE'' 21 

that they will have power to secure the blessing 
which they ask of God. Remember that if a vessel 
that ought to be one whole is cracked into many 
pieces, it cannot be filled. You can take a potsherd, 
one ijart of a vessel, and dip out a little water into 
that, but if you want the vessel full, the vessel must 
be whole. That is literally true of Christ's Church, 
and if there is one thing we must pray for still, it is 
this: Lord melt us together into one by the power of 
the Holy Spirit; let the Holy Spirit, who at Pente- 
cost made them ail of one heart and one soul, do His 
blessed work among us. Praise God, we can love 
each other in a divine love, for " the fruit of the Spirit 
is love," Give yourselves up to love, and the Holy 
Spirit will come; receive the Spirit, and He will 
teach you to love more. 

I. 

Now, why is it that the fruit of the Spirit is love? 
Because God is love. 

And what does that mean? 

It is the very nature and being of God to delight 
in communicating Himself. God has no selfishness, 
God keeps nothing to Himself. God's nature is to 
be always giving. In the sun and the moon and the 
stars, in every flower you see it, in every bird in the 
air, in every fish in the sea. God communicates life 
to His creatures. And the angels around His throne, 
the seraphim and cherubim who are flames of fire — 
whence have they their glory? It is because God is 
love, and He imparts to them of His brightness and 
His blessedness. And we. His redeemed children — 
God delights to pour His love into us. And why? 



22 " THE FRUIT OF THE SPIRIT IS LOVE'' 

Because, as I said, God keeps nothing for Himself. 
From eternity God had His only begotten Son, and 
the Father gave Him all things, and nothing that 
God had was kept back. " God is love." 

One of the old Church fathers said that we cannot 
better understand the Trinity than as a revelation of 
divine love — the Father the loving One, the Fountain 
of love; the Son the beloved one, the Keservoir of 
love, in whom the love was poured out; and the 
Spirit the living love that united both and then over- 
flowed into this world. The Spirit of Pentecost, the 
Spirit of the Father, and the Spirit of the Son is 
love. And when the Holy Spirit comes to us and to 
other men, will He be less a Spirit of love than He 
is in God? It cannot be; He cannot change His na- 
ture. The Spirit of God is love, and " the fruit of 
the Spirit is love." 

II. 

Why is that so? That was the one great need of 
mankind, that was the thing which Christ's redemp- 
tion came to accomplish: to restore love to this 
world. 

When man sinned, why was it that he sinned? 
Selfishness triumphed — he sought self instead of 
God. And just look! Adam at once begins to accuse 
the woman of having led him astray. Love to God 
had gone, love to man was lost. Look again: of the 
first two children of Adam, the one becomes a mur- 
derer of his brother. 

Does not that teach us that sin had robbed the 
world of love ? Ah ! what a proof the history of the 
world has been of love having been lost! There may 



" THE FRUIT OF THE SPIRIT IS LOVE'' 23 

have been beautiful examples of love even among the 
heathen, but only as a little remnant of what was 
lost. One of the worst things sin did for man was to 
make him selfish, for selfishness cannot love. 

The Lord Jesus Christ came down from heaven as 
the Son of God's love. " God so loved the world that 
He gave His only begotten Son." God's Son came 
to show what love is, and He lived a life of love here 
upon earth in fellowship with His disciples, in com- 
passion over the poor and miserable, in love even to 
His enemies, and He died the death of love. And 
when He went to heaven, whom did He send down? 
The Spirit of love, to come and banish selfishness 
and envy and pride, and bri ng the love of God into 
the hearts of men. " The fruit of the Spirit is love." 

And what was the preparation for the promise of 
the Holy Spirit? You know that promise as found 
in the fourteenth chapter of John's gospel. But re- 
member what precedes, in the thirteenth chapter. 
Before Christ promised the Holy Si3irit He gave a 
new commandment, and about that new command- 
ment He said wonderful things. One thing was: 
" Even as I have loved you, so love ye one another." 
To them His dying love was to be the only law of 
their conduct and intercourse with each other. 
What a message to those fishermen, to those men full 
of pride and selfishness! "Learn to love each 
other," said Christ, " as I have loved you." And by 
the grace of God they did it. When Pentecost came 
they were of one heart and one soul. Christ did it 
for them. 

And now He calls us to dwell and to walk in love. 
He demands that though a man hate you, still you 



24 ''THE FRUIT OF THE SPIRIT IS LOVE'' 

love him. True love cannot be conquered by any- 
thing in heaven or upon the earth. The more hatred 
there is, the more love triumphs through it all and 
shows its true nature. This is the love that Christ 
commanded His disciples to exercise, 

What more did He say? "By this shall all men 
know that ye are my disciples, if ye have love one to 
another," 

You all know what it is to wear a badge. Many of 
you wear a blue ribbon badge, and everybody knows 
what that means. And Christ said to His disciples 
in effect: 

" I give you a badge, and that badge is 

LOVE. 

That is to be your mark. It is the only thing in 
heaven or on earth by which men can know me." 

Oh! do not we begin to fear that love has fled from 
the earth? That if we were to ask the world: "Have 
you seen us wear the badge of love?" the world would 
say: "No; what we have heard of the Church of 
Christ is that there is not a place where there is no 
quarreling and separation." Let us ask God with one 
heart that we may wear the badge of Jesus' love. 
God is able to give it. 

III. 

" The fruit of the Spirit is love." Why? Be- 
cause nothing hut love can expel and conquer our 
selfishness. 

Self is the great curse, whether in its relation to 
God, or to our fellow men in general, or to fellow^ 
Christians; thinking of ourselves and seeking our 



''THE FRUIT OF THE SPIRIT IS LOVE'' 25 

own. Self is our greatest curse. But, praise God, 
Christ came to redeem us from self. We sometimes 
talk about deliverance from the self^life — and thank 
Grod for every word that can be said about it to help 
us — but I am afraid some people think deliverance 
from the 6elf4ife means that now they are going to 
have no longer any trouble in serving God; and they 
forget that deliverance from selfdife means to be a 
vessel overflowing with love to everybody all the day. 

And there you have the reason why many people 
pray for the j^ower of the Holy Ghost, and they get 
something, but oh, so little! because they prayed for 
power for work, and power for blessing, but they 
have not prayed for power for full deliverance from 
self. That means not only the righteous self in inter- 
course with God, but the unloving self in intercourse 
with men. And there is deliverance. " The fruit of 
the Spirit is love." I bring you the glorious promise 
of Christ that He is able to fill our hearts with 
love. 

A great many of us try hard at times to love. We 
try to force ourselves to love, and I do not aay that is 
wrong; it is better than nothing. But the end of it 
is always very sad. '' I fail continually," such an one 
must confess. And v/hat is the reason? The reason 
is simply this: Because they have never ^.earned to 
believe and accept the truth that the Holy 1 Spirit can 
pour God's love into their heart. That bh^isod text; 
often it has been limited! — "The love of Go4 is shed 
abroad in our hearts." It has often been understood 
in this sense: It means the love of God to iw^^ Oh, 
what a limitation! That is only the beginning. The 
love of God is always the love of God in its '^ii*;Wty, 



26 " THE FRUIT OF THE SPIRIT IS LOVE'' 

in its fulness as an indwelling power, a love of 
God to me that leaps back to Him in love, and 
overflows to my fellow men in love — God's love to 
me, and my love to God, and my love to my fellow 
men. The three are one; you cannot separate them. 

Do believe that the love of God can be shed abroad 
in your heart and mine so that we can love all the 
day. 

"Ah!" you say, "how little I have understood 
that!" 

Why is a lamb always gentle? Because that is its 
nature. Does it cost the lamb any trouble to be 
gentle? No. Why not? It is so beautiful and 
gentle. Has a lamb to study to be gentle? No. 
Why does that come so easy? It is its nature. And 
a wolf — why does it cost a wolf no trouble to be 
cruel, and to put its fangs into the poor lamb or 
sheep? Because that is its nature. It has not to 
summon up its courage; the wolf-nature is there. 

And how can I learn to love? Never until the 
Spirit of God fills my heart with God's love, and I 
begin to long for God's love in a very different 
sense from which I have sought it so selfishly, as 
a comfort and a joy and a happiness and a pleas- 
ure to myself; never until I begin to learn that 
" God is love," and to claim it, and receive it as an 
indvrelling power for self-sacrifice; never until I be- 
gin to see that my glory, my blessedness, is to be 
like God and like Christ, in giving up everything in 
myself for my fellow-men. May God teach us that! 
Oh, the divine blessedness of the love with which the 
Holy Spirit can fill our hearts! "The fruit of the 
Spirit is love." 



''THE FRUIT OF THE SPIRIT IS LOVE'' 21 

IV. 

Once again I ask, Why must this be so? And my 
answer is: Without this we cannot live the daily life 
of love. 

How often, when we speak about the consecrated 
life, we have to speak about temper, and some people 
have sometimes said: 

"You make too much of temper." 

I do not think we can make too much of it. Do 
you see yonder clock? You know what those hands 
mean. The hands tell me what is within the clock, 
and if I see that the hands stand still, and that the 
hands point wrong, and that the clock is slow or fast, 
I say that there is something inside the clock that is 
wrong. And temper is just like the revelation that 
the clock gives of what is within. Temper is a proof 
whether the love of Christ is filling the heart, or not. 
How many there are who find it easier in church, or 
in the prayer-meeting, or in work for the Lord, dili- 
gent, earnest work, to be holy and happy than in the 
daily life with wife and children and servant; easier 
to be holy and happy outside the home than in it. 
Where is the love of God ? In Christ. God has pre- 
pared for us a wonderful redemption in Christ, and 
He longs to make something supernatural of us. 
Have we learned to long for it, and ask for it, and 
expect it in its fulness? 

Then there is the tongue! We sometimes speak 
of the tongue when we talk of the better life and the 
restful life, but just think what liberty many Chris- 
tians give to their tongues. They say: 

" I have a right to think what I like," 



28 " THE FRUIT OF THE SPIRIT IS LOVE" 

When they speak about each other, when they 
speak about their neighbors, when they speak about 
other Christians, how often there are sharp remarks! 
God keep me from saying anything that would be 
unloving; God shut my mouth if I am not to speak 
in tender love. But what I am saying is a fact. 
How often there is found among Christians who are 
banded together in work, sharp criticism, sharp judg- 
ment, hasty opinion, unloving words, secret contempt 
of each other, secret condemnation of each other. 
Oh, just as a mother's love covers her children and 
delights in them and has the tenderest compassion 
with their foibles or failures, so there ought to be in 
the heart of every believer a motherly love toward 
every brother and sister in Christ: Have you aimed 
at that? Have you sought it? Have you ever 
pleaded for it? Jesus Christ said: " As I have loved 
you . . . love one another." And He did not 
put that among the other commandments, but He said 
in effect: 

" That is a new commandment, the one command- 
ment: Love one another as I have loved you." 

It is in our daily life and conduct that the fruit of 
the Spirit is love. From that there comes all the 
graces and virtues in which love is manifested: joy, 
peace, longsuffering, gentleness, goodness; no sharp- 
ness or hardness in your tone, no unkindness or self- 
ishness; meekness before God and man. You see 
that all these are the gentler virtues. I have often 
thought as I read those words in Colossians, " Put on 
therefore as the elect of God, holy and beloved, 
bowels of mercies, kindness, humbleness of mind, 
meekness, longsuffering," that if we had written, we 



''THE FRUIT OF THE SPIRIT IS LOVE'' 29 

should have put in the foreground the manly virtues, 
such as zeal, courage and diligence; but we need to 
see how the gentler, the most womanly virtues are 
specially connected with dependence upon the Holy 
Spirit. These are indeed heavenly graces. They 
never were found in the heathen world. Christ was 
needed to come from heaven to teach us. Your 
blessedness is longsuffering, meekness, kindness; 
your glory is humility before God. The fruit of the 
Spirit, that He brought from heaven out of the 
heart of the crucified Christ, and that He gives in 
our heart, is first and foremost — love. 

You know what John says: "No man hath seen 
God at any time. If we love one another, God 
dwelleth in us." That is, I cannot see God, but as 
a compensation I can see my brother, and if I love 
him God dwells in me. Is that really true? That I 
cannot see God, but I must love my brother, and 
God will dwell in me? Loving my brother is the 
w^ay to real fellowshij) with God. You know what 
John further says in that most solemn test, 1 John, 
4 : 20 : " If a man say, I love God, and hateth his brother, 
he is a liar; for he that loveth not his brother whom 
he hath seen, how can he love God whom he hath 
not seen?" There is a brother, a most unlovable 
man. He worries you every time you meet him. 
He is of the very opposite disposition to yours. You 
are a careful business man, and you have to do with 
him in your business. He is most untidy, un- 
businesS'like. You say: 

" I cannot love him." 

Oh friend, you have not learned the lesson that 
Christ wanted to teach above everything. Let a 



30 ''THE FRUIT OF THE SPIRIT IS LOVE'' 

man be what he will, you are to love him. Love is 
to be the fruit of the Spirit all the day and every 
day. Yes, listen! if a man loves not his brother 
whom he hath seen, if you don't love that unlovable 
man whom you have seen, how can you love God 
whom you have not seen? You can deceive your- 
self with beautiful thoughts about loving God. You 
must prove your love to God by your love to your 
brother; that is the one standard by which God will 
judge your love to Him. If the love of God is in 
your heart you will love your brother. The fruit of 
the Spirit is love. 

And what is the reason that God's Holy Spirit 
cannot come in power? Is it not possible? 

You remember the comparison I used in speaking 
of the vessel. I can dip a little water into a potsherd, 
a bit of a vessel; but if a vessel is to be full it must 
be unbroken. And the children of God, wherever 
they come together, to whatever church or mission 
or society they belong, must love each other in- 
tensely, or the Spirit of God cannot do His work. 
We talk about grieving the Spirit of God by worldli- 
ness and ritualism and formality and error and in- 
difference, but, I tell you, the one thing above every- 
thing that grieves God's Spirit is this want of love. 
Let every heart search itself, and ask that God may 
search it. 



Why are we taught that " the fruit of the Spirit is 
love"? Because the Spirit of God has come to make 
our daily life an exhibition of divine poicer and a 
revelation of what God can do for His children. 



" THE FRUIT OF THE SPIRIT IS LOVE'' 31 

In the second and the fourth chapters of Acts we 
read that the disciples were of one heart and of one 
soul. During the three years they had walked with 
Christ they never had been in that spirit. All 
Christ's teaching could not make them of one heart 
and one soul. But the Holy Spirit came from heaven 
and shed the love of God in their hearts, and they 
were of one heart and one soul. The same Holy 
Spirit that brought the love of heaven into their 
hearts must fill us too. Nothing less will do. Even 
as Christ did, one might preach love for three years 
with^he tongue of an angel, but that would not 
teach any man to love unless the power of the Holy 
Spirit should come upon him to bring the love of 
heaven into his heart. 

Think of the Church at large. What divisions! 
Think of the different bodies. Take the question of 
holiness, take the question of the cleansing blood, 
take the question of the baptism of the Spirit — what 
differences are caused among dear believers by such 
questions! That there should be 

DIFFERENCES OF OPINION 

does not trouble me. We have not all got the same 
constitution and temperament and mind. But how 
often hate, bitterness, contempt, separation, unlov- 
ingness, are caused by the holiest truths of God's 
Word! Our doctrines, our creeds, have been more 
important than love. We often think we are valiant 
for the truth, and we forget God's command to speak 
the truth m love. And it was so in the time of the 
Reformation between the Lutheran and Calvinistic 
churches. What bitterness there was then in regard 



32 ''THE FRUIT OF THE SPIRIT IS LOVE'' 

to the Holy Supper, wliicli was meant to be tlie bond 
of union between all believers! And so, down the 
ages, the very dearest truths of God have become 
mountains that have separated us. 

If we want to pray in power, and if we want to 
expect the Holy Spirit to come down in power, and 
if we want indeed that God shall pour out His Spirit, 
we must enter into a covenant with God that we love 
one another with a heavenly love. 

Are you ready for that? Only that is true love 
that is large enough to take in all God's children, the 
most unloving and unlovable, and unworthy, and 
unbearable, and trying. If my vow — absolute sur- 
render to God — was true, then it must mean absolute 
surrender to the divine love to fill me; to be a servant 
of love to love every child of God around me. " The 
fruit of the Spirit is love." 

Oh, God did something wonderful when He gave 
Christ, at His right hand, the Holy Spirit to come 
down out of the heart of the Father and His everlast- 
ing love. And how we have degraded the Holy 
Spirit into a mere power by which we have to do 
our work! God forgive us. Oh that the Holy Spirit 
might be held in honor as a power to fill us with the 
very life and nature of God and of Christ! 

VI. 

"The fruit of the Spirit is love." I ask once 
again. Why is it so? And the answer comes: That 
is the only power in which Christians really can do 
their work. 

Yes, it is that we need. We want not only love 
that is to bind us to each other, but we want a divine 



" THE FRUIT OF THE SPIRIT IS LOVE'' 33 

love in our work for the lost around us. Oh, do we 
not often undertake a great deal of work just as men 
undertake work of philanthropy, from a natural spirit 
of comjpassion for our fellow^men? Do we not often 
undertake Christian work because our minister or 
friend calls to it? and do we not often perform Chris- 
tian work with a certain zeal but without having had 
a baptism of love? 

People often ask: " What is the baptism of fire?" 

I have answered more than once: I know no fire 
like the fire of God, the fire of everlasting love that 
consumed the sacrifice on Calvary. The baptism of 
love is what the Church needs, and to get that we 
must begin at once to get down upon our faces be- 
fore God in confession, and plead: 

" Lord, let love from heaven flow down into my 
heart. I am giving up my life to pray and live as 
one who has given himself up for the everlasting 
love to dwell in and fill him." 

Ah yes, if the love of God were in our hearts, what 
a difference it would make! There are hundreds of 
believers who say: 

" I work for Christ, and I feel I could work much 
more, but I have not the gift. I do not know how or 
where to begin. I do not know what I can do." 

Brother, sister, ask God to baptize you with the 
Spirit of love, and love will find its way. Love is a 
fire that will burn through every difficulty. You 
may be a shy, hesitating man, who cannot speak well, 
but love can burn through everything. God fill us 
with love! We need it for our work. 

You have read many a touching story of love ex- 
pressed, and you have said. How beautiful ! I heard 



34 " THE FRUIT OF THE SPIRIT IS LOVE'' 

one not long ago. A lady had been asked to speak at 
a. Rescue Home where there were a number of poor 
women. As she arrived there and got to the window 
with the matron, she saw outside a wretched object 
sitting, and asked: 

"Who is that?" 

The matron answered: " She has been into the 
house thirty or forty times, and she has always gone 
away again. Nothing can be done with her, she is so 
low and hard." 

But the lady said: " She must come in." 

The matron then said: " We have been waiting for 
you, and the company is assembled, and you have 
only an hour for the address." 

The lady replied: " No, this is of more importance "; 
and she went outside where the woman was sitting, 
and said: 

"My sister, what is the matter?" 

"I am not your sister," was the reply. 

Then the lady laid her hand on her, and said: 
"Yes, I am your sister, and I love you"; and so she 
spoke until the heart of the poor woman was touched, 

The conversation lasted some time, and the com- 
pany were waiting patiently. Ultimately the lady 
brought the woman into the room. There was the 
poor wretched, degraded creature, full of shame. She 
would not sit on a chair, but sat down on a stool be- 
side the speaker's seat, and she let her lean against 
her, with her arms around the poor woman's neck, 
while she spoke to the assembled people. And that 
love touched the woman's heart; she had found one 
who really loved her, and that love gave access to the 
love of Jesus. 



•' THE FRUIT OF THE SPIRIT IS LOVE'' 35 

Praise God! there is love upon earth in the hearts 
of God's children; but oh, that there were more! 

God, baptize our ministers with a tender love, 
and our missionaries, and our colporters, and our 
Bible-readers, and our workers, and our young men's 
and young women's associations. Oh that God 
would begin with us now, and baptize us with heaven- 
ly love ! 

VII. 

Once again. It is only love that can fit us for the 
work of intercession. 

1 have said that love must fit us for our work. Do 
you know what the hardest and the most important 
work is that has to be done for this sinful world? It 
is the work of intercession, the work of going to God 
and taking time to lay hold on Him. 

A man may be an earnest Christian, an earnest 
minister, and a man may do good, but alas! how often 
he has to confess that he knows but little of what it 
is to tarry with God! May God give us the great 
gift of an intercessory spirit, a spirit of prayer and 
supplication! Let me ask you in the name of Jesus 
not to let a day pass without praying for all saints, 
and for all God's people. 

I find there are Christians who think little of that. 
I find there are prayer^unions where they pray for the 
members, and not for all believers. I pray you, take 
time to pray for the Church of Christ. It is right to 
pray for the heathen, as I have already said. God 
help us to pray more for them. It is rig\t to pray for 
missionaries and for evangelistic work, aid for the 
unconverted. But Paul did not tell peopl. to pray 



30 ''THE FRUIT OF THE SPIRIT IS LOVE'' 

for the heathen or the unconverted. Paul told them 
to pray for believers. Do make this your first prayer 
every day: 

"loed, bless thy saints everywheee." 

The state of Christ's Church is indescribably low. 
Plead for God's people that He would visit them, 
plead for each other, plead for all believers who are 
trying to work for God. Let love fill your heart. Ask 
Christ to pour it out afresh into you every day. Try 
to get it into you by the Holy Spirit of God: I am 
separated unto the Holy Spirit, and the fruit of the 
Spirit is love. God heli^ us to understand it. 

May God grant that we learn day by day to wait 
more quietly upon Him, Do not wait upon God only 
for ourselves, or the power to do so will soon be lost; 
but give ourselves up to the ministry and the love of 
intercession, and pray more for God's people, for 
God's people round about us for the Spirit of love in 
ourselves and in them, and for the work of God we 
are connected with; and the answer will surely come, 
and our waiting upon God will be a source of untold 
blessing and power. " The fruit of the Spirit is 
love." 

Have you a lack of love to confess before God? 
Then make confession and say before Him; "O Lord, 
my want of heart, my want or love — I confess it." 
And then, as you cast that want at His feet, believe 
that the blood cleanses you, that Jesus comes in His 
mighty cleansing, saving power to deliver you, and 
that He will '^ive His Holy Spirit. 



SEPARATED UNTO THE HOLY GHOST. 

"Now there were in the church that was at Antioch 
certain prophets and teachers; as Barnabas, and Sim- 
eon that was called Niger, and Lucius of Cyrene, and 
and Manaen . . . and Saul. 

"As they ministered to the Lord and fasted, the 
Holy Ghost said. Separate me Barnabas and Saul for 
the work whereunto I have called them. 

" And when they had fasted and prayed, and laid 
their hands on them, they sent them away. So they, 
being sent forth by the Holy Ghost, departed unto 
Seleucia." — Acts xiii. 1-4. 

In the story of our text we shall find some precious 
thoughts to guide us as to what God would have of 
us, and what God would do for us. The great lesson 
of the verses quoted is this: TJie Holy Gliost is 
the director of the loork of God upon the earth. And 
what we should do if we are to work rightly for God, 
and if God is to bless our work, is to see that we 
stand in a right relation to the Holy Ghost, that we 
give Him every day the place of honor that belongs 
to Him, and that in all our work and (what is more) 
in all our private inner life, the Holy Ghost shall al- 
ways have the first place. Let me point out to you 
some of the precious thoughts our passage suggests. 

And, first of all, we see that God has His own 
plans tvith regard to His hincjdom. 

His church at Antioch had been established. God 

37 



38 SEPARATED UNTO THE HOLY GHOST 

had certain plans and intentions with regard to Asia, 
and with regard to Europe. He had conceived them ; 
they were His, and He made them known to His serv- 
ants. 

Our great Commander organizes every campaign, 
and His generals and officers do not always know the 
great plans. They often receive sealed orders, and they 
have to wait on Him for what He gives them as orders. 
God in heaven has wishes, and a will, in regard to any 
work that ought to be done, and to the way in which 
it has to be done. Blessed is the man who gets into 
God's secrets and works under God. 

Some years ago, at Wellington, South Africa, 
where I live, we opened a Mission Institute — what 
is counted there a fine large building. At our open- 
ing services the Principal said something that I 
have never forgotten. He remarked: 

" Last year we gathered here to lay the foundation^ 
stone, and what was there then to be seen? Nothing 
but rubbish, and stones, and bricks, and ruins of an 
old building that had been pulled dow^n. There we 
laid the foundation-stone, and very few knew what 
the building was that was to rise. No one knew it 
perfectly in every detail except one man, the archi- 
tect. In his mind it was all clear, and as the con- 
tractor and the mason and the carpenter came to 
their work they took their orders from him, and the 
humblest laborer had to be obedient to orders, and 
the structure rose, and this beautiful building has 
been completed. And just so," he added, " this 
building that we open to-day is but laying the foun- 
dation of a work of which only God knows what is 
to become." 



SEPARATED UNTO THE HOLY GHOST 39 

But God has His workers and His plans clearly 
mapped out, and our position is to wait, that God 
should communicate to us as much of His will as 
each time is needful. 

We have simply to be faithful in obedience, car- 
rying out His orders. God has a plan for His Church 
upon earth. But alas! we too often make our plan, 
and we think that we know what ought to be done. 
We ask God fii'st to bless our feeble efforts, instead 
of absolutely refusing to go unless God go before 
us. God has planned for the work and the extension 
of His kingdom. The Holy Ghost has had that work 
given in charge to Him. " The work whereunto I 
have called them." May God therefore help us all 
to be afraid of touching " the ark of God " except 
as we are led by the Holy Ghost. 

Then the second thought: — God is imlling and 
able to reveal to His servants what His will is. 

Yes, blessed be God, communications come down 
from heaven still! As we read here what the Holy 
Ghost said, so still the Holy Ghost will speak to 
His Church and His people. In these later days He 
has often done it. He has come to individual men, 
and by His divine teaching He has led them out 
into fields of labor that others could not at first un- 
derstand or approve; into ways and methods that 
did not recommend themselves to the majority. But 
the Holy Ghost does still in our time teach His peo- 
ple. Thank God, in our foreign missionary societies 
and in our home missions, and in a thousand forms 
of work, the guiding of the Holy Ghost is known, 
but (we are all ready, I think, to confess) too little 
known. We have not learned enough to wait upon 



40 SEr ABATED UNTO THE HOLY GHOST 

Him, and so we should make a solemn declaration 
before God: O God, we want to wait more for Thee 
to show us Thy will. 

Do not ask God only for power. Many a Chris- 
tian has his own plan of working, but God must 
send the power. The man works in his own will, 
and God must give the grace — the one reason why 
God often gives so little grace and so little success. 
But let us all take our place before God and say: 

" What is done in the will of God the strength of 
God will not be withheld from it; what is done in 
the will of God must have the mighty bfessing of 
God." 

And so let our first desire be to have the will of God 
revealed. 

If you ask me, is it an easy thing to get these 
communications from heaven, and to understand 
them? I can give you the ansvrer. It is easy to 
those who are in right fellowship with heaven, and 
who understand 

THE ART OF WAITING UPON GOD. 

How often we ask: How can a person know the 
will of God? And people want, when they are in 
perplexity, to pray very earnestly that God should 
answer them at once. But God can only reveal His 
will to a heart that is humble and tender and empty. 
God can only reveal His will in perplexities and 
special difficulties to a heart that has learned to obey 
and honor Him loyally in little things and in daily 
life. 

That brings me to the ihird thought: — Noie the 
disposition to ivhich the Spirit revecds God^s will. 

What do we read here? There were a number of 



SEPARATED UNTO THE HOLY GHOST 41 

men ministering to the Lord and fasting, and the 
Holy Ghost came and spoke to them. Some people 
understand this passage very much as they would in 
reference to a missionary committee of our day. We 
see there is an open field, and we have had our mis- 
sions in other fields, and we are going to get on to 
that field. We have virtually settled that, and we 
pray about it. But the position was a very different 
one in those former days. I doubt whether any of 
them thought of Europe, for later on even Paul 
himself assayed to go back into Asia, till the night 
vision called him by the will of God. Look at those 
men. God had done wonders. He had extended the 
Church to Antioch, and He had given rich and large 
blessing. Now, here were these men ministering to the 
Lord, serving Him with prayer and fasting. What 
a deep conviction they have — " It must all come di- 
rect from heaven. We are in fellowship with the 
risen Lord; we must have a close union with Him, 
and somehow He will let us know what He wants." 
And there they were, empty, ignorant, helpless, glad 
and j'oyful, but deeply humbled. 

*' O Lord," they seem to say, " we are Thy servants, 
and in fasting and prayer we wait upon Thee. What 
isThy willfor us?" 

Was it not the same with Peter? He was on the 
housetop, fasting aud jDraying, and little did he think 
of the vision and the command to go to Csesarea. 
He was ignorant of what his work might be. 

It is in hearts entirely surrendered to the Lord 
Jesus, in hearts separating themselves from the world, 
and even from ordinary religious exercises, and giv- 
ing themselves up in intense prayer to look to their 



42 SEPARATED UNTO THE HOLY GHOST 

Lord — it is in such hearts that the heavenly will 
of God will be made manifest. 

You know that word " fasting " occurs a second 
time (in the third verse): " They fasted and prayed." 
When you pray, you love to go into your closet, ac- 
cording to the command of Jesus, and shut the door. 
You shut out business and company and pleasure and 
anything that can distract, and you want to be alone 
with God. But in one shape even the material world 
follows you there. You must eat. These men wanted 
to shut themselves out from the influences of the ma- 
terial and the visible, and they fasted. What they 
ate was simply enough to supply the wants of nature, 
and in the intensity of their souls they thought to 
give expression to their letting-go of everything on 
earth, in their fasting before God. Oh, may God 
give us that intensity of desire, that separation from 
everything, because we want to wait upon God, that 
the Holy Ghost may reveal to us God's blessed will. 

The fourth thought. What is now the will of God 
as the Holy Ghost reveals it? It is contained in one 
word: Separaiio7i unto the Holy Ghost. That is 

THE KEYNOTE OF THE MESSAGE FEOM HEAVEN. 

" Separate me Barnabas and Saul for the work 
whereunto I have called them. The work is mine, 
and I care for it, and I have chosen these men and 
called them, and I want you who represent the 
Church of Christ ujDon earth, to set them apart unto 
me." 

Look at this heavenly message in its twofold as- 
pect. The men were to be set apart to the Holy 
Ghost, and the Church was to do this separating 



SEPARATED UNTO THE HOLY GHOST 43 

loork. The Holy Ghost could trust these men to do 
it in a right spirit. There they were abiding in fel- 
lowship with the heavenly, and the Holy Ghost could 
say to them, Do the work of separating these men. 
And these were the men the Holy Ghost had pre- 
pared, and He could say of them, Let them be sepa- 
rated unto me. 

Here we come to the very root, to the very life of 
the need of Christian workers. The question is: 
What is needed that the power of God should rest 
upon us more mightily, that the blessing of God 
should be poured out more abundantly among those 
poor wretched people and perishing sinners among 
whom we labor? And the answer from heaven is: 

" I want men separated unto the Holy Ghost." 

What does that imply ? You know that there are 
two spirits on earth. Christ said, when He spoke 
about the Holy Spirit: "The world cannot receive 
Him." Paul said: " We have received not the spirit 
of the world, but the Spirit that is of God." That is 
the great want in every worker — the spirit of the 
world going out, and the Spirit of God coming in to 
take possession of the inner life, and of the whole 
being. 

I am sure there are workers who often cry to God 
for the Holy Spirit to come upon them as a Spirit of 
power for their work, and when they feel that meas- 
ure of power, and get blessing, they thank God for it. 
But God wants something more and something 
higher. God wants us to seek for the Holy Spirit as 
a Spirit of power in our own heart and life, to con- 
quer self and cast out sin, and work the blessed and 
beautiful image of Jesus into us. 



41 SEPARATED UNTO THE HOLY GHOST 

There is a difference between the power of the 
Spirit as a gift, and the power of the Spirit for the 
grace of a holy life. A man may often have a meas- 
ure of the power of the Spirit, but if there be not a 
large measure of the Spirit as the Spirit of grace and 
holiness, the defect will be manifest in his work. He 
may be made the means of conversion, but he never 
will help people on to a higher standard of spiritual 
life, and when he passes away a great deal of his 
work may pass away too. But a man who is sepa- 
rated unto the Holy Ghost is a man who is given up 
to say: 

" Father, let the Holy Ghost have full domin- 
ion^ over me, in my home, in my temper, in every 
word of my tongue, in every thought of my heart, in 
every feeling towards my fellow men; let the Holy 
Spirit have entire possession." 

Is that what has been the longing and the cove- 
nant of your heart with your God — to be a man or a 
woman separated and given up unto the Holy Ghost? 
I pray you listen to the voice of heaven. " Separate 
me," said the Holy Ghost. Yes, separated unto the 
Holy Ghost. May God grant that the Word may 
enter into the very depths of our being to search us, 
and if we discover that we have not come out from 
the world entirely, if God discovers to us that the 
selfdife, self-will, self^exaltation are there, let us 
humble ourselves before Him. 

Man, woman, brother, sister, you are a worker sep- 
arated unto the Holy Ghost. Is that true? Has 
that been your longing desire? Has that been your 
surrender? Has that been what you have expected 
through faith in the power of our risen and almighty 



SEPARATED UNTO THE HOLY GHOST 45 

Lord Jesus? If not, here is the call of faith, and 
here is the key of blessing — separated unto the Holy 
Ghost. God write the word in our hearts! 

I said the Holy Spirit spoke to that church as a 
church capable of doing that work. The Holy Spirit 
trusted them. God grant that our churches, our 
missionary societies, and our workers' unions, that all 
our directors and councils and committees may be 
men and women who are fit for the icork of separat- 
ing ivorkers unto the Holy Spirit. We can ask God 
for that too. 

Then comes my fifth thought, and it is this; — 
This holy partnership ivith the Holy Spirit in His 
work becomes a ^natter of consciousness and of 
action. 

These men, what did they do? They set apart Paul 
and Barnabas, and then it is written of the two that 
they, being sent forth by the Holy Ghost, went down 
to Seleucia. Oh, what fellowship! The Holy Spirit 
in heaven doing part of the work, man on earth 
doing the other part. After the ordination of the 
men upon earth, it is written in God's inspired Word 
that they were sent forth by the Holy Ghost. 

And see how this partnership calls to new prayer 
and fasting. They had for a certain time been min- 
istering to the Lord and fasting, perhaps days; and 
the Holy Spirit speaks, and they have to do the work 
and to enter into partnership, and at once they come 
together for more prayer and fasting. That is the 
spirit in which they obey the command of their 
Lord. And that teaches us that it is not only in the 
beginning of our Christian work, but all along, that 
we need to have our strength in prayer. If there is 



46 SEPARATED UNTO THE HOLY GHOST 

one thought with regard to the Church of Christ, 
which at times comes to me with overwhelming sor- 
row; if there is one thought, in regard to my own 
life, of which I am ashamed; if there is one thought 
of which I feel that the Church of Christ has not 
accepted it and not grasped it; if there is one thought 
which makes me pray to God: " Oh, teach us by Thy 
grace, new things " — it is the 

WONDERFUL POWER THAT PRAYER IS MEANT TO HAVE 

in the kingdom. We have so little availed ourselves 
of it. 

We have all read the expression of Christian in 
Bunyan's great work, when he found he had the key 
in his breast that should unlock the dungeon. We 
have the key that can unlock the dungeon of atheism 
and of heathendom. But, oh! we are far more oc- 
cupied with our work than we are with prayer. We 
believe more in speaking to men than we believe in 
speaking to God. Learn from these men that the 
work which the Holy Ghost commands must call us 
to new fasting and prayer, to new separation from 
the spirit and the pleasures of the world, to new con- 
secration to God and to His fellowship. Those men 
gave themselves up to fasting and prayer, and if 
in all our ordinary Christian work there were more 
prayer there would be more blessing in our own 
inner life. If we felt and proved and testified to the 
world that our only strength lay in keeping every 
minute in contact with Christ, every minute allowing 
God to work in us — if that were our spirit, would 
not, by the grace of God, our lives be holier? Would 
not they be more abundantly fruitful? 



StlP ABATED UNTO THE HOLY GHOST il 

I hardly know a more solemn warning in God's 
Word than that which we find in the third chapter of 
Galatians, where Paul asked: 

" Having begun in the Spirit, are ye now made 
perfect by the flesh? " 

Do you understand what that means? A terrible 
danger in Christian work, just as in a Christian life 
that is begun with much prayer, begun in the Holy 
Spirit, is that it may be gradually shunted off on to 
the lines of the flesh; and the word comes: " Having 
begun in the Spirit, are ye now made perfect by the 
flesh?" In the time of our first perplexity and 
helplessness we prayed much to God, and God an- 
swered and God blessed, and our organization became 
perfected, and our band of workers became large; 
but gradually the organization and the work and the 
rush have so got possesion of us that the power of 
the Spirit, in which we began when we were a small 
company, has almost been lost. Oh, I pray you, note 
it well! It was with new prayer and fasting, with 
more prayer and fasting, that this company of dis- 
ciples carried out the command of the Holy Ghost. 
" My soul, wait thou only upon God." That is our 
highest and most important work. The Holy Spirit 
comes in answer to believing prayer. 

You know when the exalted Jesus had ascended to 
the throne, for ten days the footstool of the throne 
was the place where His waiting disciples cried to 
Him. And that is the law of the kingdom — the 
King upon the throne, the servants upon the foot- 
stool. May God find us there unceasingly! 

Then comes the last thought:— TF/ia^ a wonderful 
blessing comes when the Holy Ghost is allowed to 



48 SEPARATED UNTO THE HOLY GHOST 

lead and to direct the work, and when it is carried 
on in obedience to Him! 

You know the story of the mission on which 
Barnabas and Saul were sent out. You know what 
power there was with them. The Holy Ghost sent 
them, and they went on from place to place with large 
blessing. The Holy Ghost was their leader further 
on. You recollect how it was by the Spirit that Paul 
was hindered from going again into Asia, and was 
led away over to Europe. Oh, the blessing that rest- 
ed upon that little company of men, and upon their 
ministry unto the Lord! 

I pray you, let us learn to believe that God has a 
blessing for us. The Holy Ghost, into whose hands 
God has put the work, has been called " the executive 
of the Holy Trinity." The Holy Ghost has not only 
power, but He has the Spirit of love. He is brood- 
ing over this dark world, and every sphere of work 
in it, and He is willing to bless. And why is there 
not more blessing? There can be but one answer. 
We have not honored the Holy Ghost as we should 
have done. Is there one who can say that that is 
not true? Is not every thoughtful heart ready to 
cry: "God forgive me that I have not honored the 
Holy Spirit as I should have done, that I have grieved 
Him, that I have allowed self and the flesh and my 
own will to work where the Holy Ghost should have 
been honored! May God forgive me that I have al- 
lowed self and the flesh and the will actually to have 
the place that God wanted the Holy Ghost to get." 

Oh, the sin is greater than we know! No wonder 
that there is so much feebleness and failure in the 
Church of Christ! 



PETER'S REPENTANCE. 

"And the Lord turned and looked upon Peter. 
And Peter remembered the word of the Lord, how 
He had said unto him, Before the cock crow, thou 
shalt deny me thrice. And Peter went out, and wept 
bitterly."— jLtt/ce 22 : 61, 62. 

That was the turning-point in the history of Peter. 
Christ had said to him: "Thou canst not follow me 
now." Peter was not in a fit state to follow Christ, 
because he had not been brought to an end of him- 
self; he did not know himself, and he therefore could 
not follow Christ. But when he went out and wept 
bitterly, then came the great change. Christ pre- 
viously said to him: "When thou art converted, 
strengthen thy brethren." Here is the point where 
Peter was converted from self to Christ. 

I thank God for the story of Peter. I do not know 
a man in the Bible who gives us greater comfort. 
When we look at his character, so full of failures, and 
at what Christ made him by the power of the Holy 
Ghost, there is hope for every one of us. But re- 
member, before Christ could fill Peter with the Holy 
Spirit, and make a new man of him, he had to go out 
and weep bitterly; he had to be humbled. If we 
want to understand this, I think there are four points 
that we must look at. First, let us look at Peter the 
devoted disciple of Jesus; next, at Peter as he lived 
the life of self ; then at Peter in his repentance; and, 

49 



50 PETER'S REPENTANCE 

lastly, at ivhat Christ made of Peier hy the Holy 
Spirit. 

1. First, then, look at 

PETER THE DEVOTED DISCIPLE OF CHRIST. 

Christ called Peter to forsake his nets and follow 
Him. Peter did it at once, and he afterwards could 
say rightly to the Lord: 

" We have forsaken all and followed Thee." 
Peter was a man of absolute surrender; he gave up 
all to follow Jesus. Peter was also a man of ready 
obedience. You remember Christ said to him: 
" Launch out into the deep, and let down the net." 
Peter the fisherman knew there were no fish there, 
for they had been toiling all night and had caught 
nothing; but he said: " At Thy word I will let down 
the net." He submitted to the w^ord of Jesus. Fur- 
ther, he was a man of great faith When he saw 
Christ walking on the sea, he said: " Lord, if it be 
Thou, bid me come unto Thee "; and at the voice of 
Christ he stepped out of the boat and walked upon 
the water. And Peter was a man of spiritual insight. 
When Christ asked the disciples: "Whom do ye say 
that I am?" Peter was able to answer: ''Thou art 
the Christ, the Son of the living God." And Christ 
said: "Blessed art thou, Simon Barjona; for flesh 
and blood hath not revealed it unto thee, but my 
Father which is in heaven." And Christ spoke of 
him as the i^ock man, and of his having the keys of 
the kingdom. Peter was a splendid man, a devoted 
disciple of Jesus, and if he was living nowadays, 
everybody would say that he was an advanced Chris- 
tian. And yet how much there was wanting in 
Peter I 



PETERS REPENTANCE 51 

2. Look next at 

PETER LIVING THE LIFE OF SELF, 

pleasing self, and trusting self, and seeking the honor 
of self. 

You recollect that just after Christ had said to 
him: "Flesh and blood hath not revealed it unto 
thee, but my Father which is in heaven," Christ be- 
gan to speak about His sufferings, and Peter dared to 
say: "Be it far from Thee, Lord; this shall not be 
unto Thee." Then Christ had to say: 

"Get thee behind me, Satan; for thou savorest 
not the things that be of God, but those that be of 
men." 

There was Peter in his self-will, trusting his own 
wisdom, and actually forbidding Christ to go and die. 
Whence did that come? Peter trusted in himself 
and his own thoughts about divine things. We see 
later on, more than once, that among the disciples 
there was a questioning who should be the greatest, 
and Peter was one of them, and he thought he had a 
right to the very first place. He sought his own 
honor even above the others. It was the life of self 
strong in Peter. He had left his boats and his nets, 
but not his old self. 

When Christ had spoken to him about His suffer- 
ings, and said: " Get thee behind me, Satan," He fol- 
lowed it up by saying: " If any man will come after 
me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross, and 
follow me." No man can follow Him unless he do 
that. Self must be utterly denied. What does that 
mean? When Peter denied Christ, we read that he 
three times said: " I do not know the man "; in other 



52 PETER'S REPENTANCE 

words: "I have nothing to do with Him; He and I 
are no friends; I deny having any connection with 
Him." Christ told Peter that he must deny self. 
Self must be ignored, and its every claim rejected. 
That is 

THE EOOT OF TRUE DISCIPLESHIP; 

but Peter did not understand it, and could not obey 
it. And what happened? When the last night came, 
Christ said to him: 

" Before the cock crow twice thou shalt deny me 
thrice." 

But with what self-confidence Peter said: " Though 
all should forsake Thee, yet will not I. I am ready 
to go with Thee, to prison and to death." 

Peter meant it honestly, and Peter really intended 
to do it; but Peter did not know himself. He did 
not believe he was so bad as Jesus said he was. 

We perhaps think of individual sins that come be- 
tween us and God, but what are we to do with that self- 
life which is all unclean, our very nature ? What are we 
to do with that flesh that is entirely under the power 
of sin? Deliverance from that is what we need. 
Peter knew it not, and therefore it was that in his 
self-confidence he went forth, and denied his Lord. 

Notice how Christ uses that word deny twice. He 
said to Peter the first time. Deny self; He said to 
Peter the second time. Thou wilt deny me. It is 
either of the two. There is no choice for us; we 
must either deny self or deny Christ. There are two 
great powers fighting each other — the self-nature in 
the power of sin, and Christ in the power of God. 
Either of these must rule within us. 



PETER'S REPENTANCE 53 

It was self that made the devil. He was an angel 
of God, but he wanted to exalt self. He became a 
devil in hell. Self was the cause of the fall of man. 
Eve ^wanted something for herself, and so our first 
parents fell into all the wretchedness of sin. We 
their children have inherited an awful nature of sin. 

3. Look LOW at 

PETER'S REPENTANCE. 

Peter denied his Lord thrice, and then the Lord 
looked upon him; and that look of Jesus broke the 
heart of Peter, and all at once there opened up before 
him the terrible sin that he had committed, the terri- 
ble failure that had come, and the dei)th into which 
he had fallen, and "Peter went out and wept bitterly." 

Oh! who can tell what that repentance must have 
been? During the following hours of that night, and 
the next day, when he saw Christ crucified and buried, 
and the next day, the Sabbath — oh, in what hopeless 
despair and shame he must have spent that day ! 

"My Lord is gone, my hope is gone, and I denied 
my Lord. After that life of love, after that blessed 
fellowship of three years, I denied my Lord. God 
have mercy upon me! " 

I do not think we can realize into what a depth of 
humiliation Peter sank then. But that was the 
turning-point and the change; and on the first day 
of the week Christ was seen of Peter, and in the 
evening He met him with the others. Later on at 
the Lake of Galilee He asked him: " Lovest thou 
me? " until Peter was made sad by the thought that 
the Lord reminded him of having denied Him thrice; 
and said in sorrow, but in uprightness: 



54 PETER'S REPENTANCE 

"Lord, Thou knowest all things; Thou knowest 
that I love Thee." 

4. And then Peter was prepared for 

THE DELIVERANCE FROM SELF; ♦ 

and that is my last thought. You know Christ took 
him with others to the footstool of the throne, 
and bade them wait there; and then on the day of 
Pentecost the Holy Spirit came, and Peter was a 
changed man. I do not want you only to think of 
the change in Peter, in that boldness, and that pow- 
er, and that insight into the Scriptures, and that 
blessing with which he preached that day. Thank 
God for that. But there was something for 
Peter deeper and better. Peter's whole nature 
was changed. The work that Christ began in 
Peter when He looked upon him, was perfected 
when he was filled with the Holy Ghost. 

If you want to see that, read the First Epistle of 
Peter. You know wherein Peter's failings lay. 
When he said to Christ, in effect: " Thou never canst 
suffer; it cannot be " — it showed he had not a con- 
ception of what it was to pass through death into 
life. Christ said: "Deny thyself,'''' and in spite of 
that he denied his Lord. When Christ warned him: 
" Thou shalt deny me," and he insisted that he never 
would, Peter showed how little he understood what 
there was in himself. But when I read his epistle 
and hear him say: " If ye be reproached for the name 
of Christ, happy are ye, for the Spirit of God and of 
glory resteth upon you," then I say that is not the 
old Peter, but that is the very Spirit of Christ 
breathing and speaking within him. 



PETERS REPENTANCE 55 

I read again how he says: " Hereunto ye are called, 
to suffer, even as Christ suffered." I understand what 
a change had come over Peter. Instead of denying 
Christ, he found joy and pleasure in having self 
denied and crucified and given up to the death. 
And therefore it is in the Acts we read that, when he 
was called before the Council, he could boldly say: 
" We must obey God rather than men," and that he 
could return with the other disciples and rejoice that 
they were counted worthy to suffer for Christ's 
name. 

You remember his self-exaltation; but now he 
has found out that " the ornament of a meek and quiet 
spirit is in the sight of God of great price." Again 
he tells us to be "subject one to another, and be 
clothed with humility." 

Dear friend, I beseech you, look at Peter utterly 
changed — the self pleasing, the self trusting, the 
self-seeking Peter, full of sin, continually get- 
ting into trouble, foolish and im]3etuous, but now 
filled with the Spirit and the life of Jesus. Christ 
had done it for him by the Holy Ghost. 

And now, what is my object in having thus very 
briefly pointed to the story of Peter? That story 
must be the history of every believer who is really 
to be made a blessing by God. That story is a 
prophecy of what every one can receive from God in 
heaven. 

Now let us just glance hurriedly at what these 
lessons teach us. 

The^?-s/ lesson is this: You may be a very ear- 
nest, godly, devoted believer, in whom the power of 
the flesh is yet very strong. 



5G PETER'S REPENTANCE 

That is a very solemn truth. Peter, before he de- 
nied Christ, had cast out devils and had healed the 
sick; and yet the flesh had power, and the flesh had 
room in him. Oh, beloved, we want to realize that 
it is just on account of there being so much of that 
self-life in us that the power of God cannot work in 
us as mightily as God is willing that it should work. 
Do you realize that the great God is longing to 
double His blessing, to give tenfold blessing through 
us? But there is something hindering Him, and 
that something is a proof of nothing but the self- life. 
We talk about the pride of Peter, and the impetuos- 
ity of Peter, and the self-confidence of Peter. It 
all rooted in that one word, self. Christ had said, 
" Deny self," and Peter had never understood, and 
never obeyed; and every failing came out of that. 

What a solemn thought, and wdiat an urgent plea 
for us to cry: O God, do discover this to us, that none 
of us may be living the self4ife! It has happened to 
many a one who had been a Christian for years, who 
had perhaps occupied a x^rominent position, that God 
found him out, and taught him to find himself out, 
and he became utterly ashamed, and fell down broken 
before God. Oh, the bitter shame and sorrow and 
pain and agony that came to him, until at last he 
found that there was deliverance! Peter went out 
and wept bitterly, and there may be many a godly 
one in whom the power of the flesh rules still. 

And then my second lesson is: — It is the work of 
our blessed Lord Jesus to discover the power of self. 

How was it that Peter, the carnal Peter, self-willed 
Peter, Peter with the strong selfdove, ever became a 
man of Pentecost and the writer of his Epistle? It 



PETER'S REPENTANCE 57 

was because Christ had him in charge, and Christ 
watched over him, and Christ taught and blessed him. 
The warnings that Christ had given him were part of 
the training; and last of all there came that look of 
love. In His suffering Christ did not forget him, 
but turned round and looked upon him, and " Peter 
went out and wept bitterly." And the Christ who 
led Peter to Pentecost is waiting to-day to take 
charge of every heart that is willing to surrender it- 
self to Him. 

Are there not some saying: "Ah! that is the mis- 
chief with me; it is always the self4ife, and self=com- 
fort, and self^consciousness, and self-pleasing, and 
self-will; how am I to get rid of it?" 

My answer is: It is Christ Jesus who can rid you 
of it; none else but Christ Jesus can give deliverance 
from the power of self. And what does He ask you 
to do? He asks that you should humble yourself be- 
fore Him. 



IMPOSSIBLE WITH MAN, POSSIBLE 
WITH GOD. 

"And He said, The things which are impossible 
with men are possible with God." — Liike xviii. 27. 

Christ had said to the rich young ruler, " Sell all that 
thou hast . . . and come, follow me." The young 
man went away sorrowful. Christ then turned to the 
disciples, and said: " How hardly shall they that 
have riches enter into the kingdom of God!" The 
disciples, we read, were greatly astonished, and an- 
swered: "If it is so difficult to enter the kingdom, 
who, then, can be saved?" And Christ gave this 
blessed answer: 

" The things which are Impossible with men are 
possible with God." 

The text contains two thoughts — that m religion, 
in the question of salvation and of following Christ 
by a holy life, it is impossible for man to do it. And 
then alongside that is the thought — What is impossi- 
ble icith man is possible loith God. 

The two thoughts mark the two great lessons that 
man has to learn in the religious life. It often takes 
a long time to learn the first lesson, that in religion 
man can do nothing, that salvation is impossible to 
man. And often a man learns that, and yet he does 
not learn the second lesson — what has been impossi- 
ble to him is possible with God. Blessed is the man 
who learns l:)oth lessons! The learning of them marks 
stages in the Christian's life. 

58 



IMPOSSIBLE WITH MAN, POSSIBLE WITH OOD 59 



The one stage is when a man is trying to do his ut- 
most and fails, when a man tries to do still better and 
fails again, when a man tries still more and always 
fails. And yet very often he does not even then 
learn the lesson: With man it is impossible to serve 
God and Christ. Peter spent three years in Christ's 
school, and he never learned that word, It is impossi- 
ble, until he had denied his Lord and went out and 
wept bitterly. Then he learned it. 

Just look for a moment at a man who is learning 
this lesson. At first he fights against it; then he sub- 
mits to it, but reluctantly and in despair; at last he 
accepts it willingly and rejoices in it. At the begin- 
ning of the Christian life the young convert has no 
conception of this truth. He has been converted, he 
has the joy of the Lord in his heart, he begins to run 
the race and fight the battle; he is sure he can con- 
quer, for he is earnest and honest, and God will help 
him. Yet, somehow, very soon he fails where he did 
not expect it, and sin gets the better of him. He is 
disappointed; but he thinks: "I was not watchful 
enough, I did not make my resolutions strong enough." 
And again he vows, and again he prays, and yet he 
fails. He thought: "Am I not a regenerate man? 
Have I not the life of Grod within me?" And he 
thinks again: "Yes, and I have Christ to help me, I 
can live the holy life." 

At a later period he comes to another state of mind. 
He begins to see such a life is impossible, but he 
does not accept it. There are multitudes of Chris- 
tians who come to this point: "I cannot"; and then 
think God never expected them to do what they can- 



60 IMPOSSIBLE WITH MAN, POSSIBLE WITH GOD 

not do. If you tell them that God does expect it, ii 
appears to them a mystery. A good many Christians 
are living a low life, a life of failure and of sin, in- 
stead of rest and victory, because they began to see: 
" I cannot, it is impossible." And yet they do not 
understand it fully, and so, under the impression, I 
cannot, they give way to despair. They will do their 
best, but they never expect to get on very far. 

But God leads His children on to a third stage, 
when a man comes to take that w^ord, It is impossible, 
in its full truth, and yet at the same time says: " I 
must do it, and I will do it — it is impossible for man, 
and yet I must do it"; w^ien the renewed will begins 
to exercise its whole power, and in intense longing 
and prayer begins to cry to God: '' Lord, what is the 
meaning of this? — how am I to be freed from the 
power of sin?" 

It is the state of the regenerate man in Rom. vii. 
There you will find the Christian man trying his very 
utmost to live a holy life. God's law has been re- 
vealed to him as reaching down into the very depth 
of the desires of the heart, and the man can dare to 
say: 

" I delight in the law of God after the inward man. 
To will what is good is present with me. My heart 
loves the law of God, and my will has chosen that 
law." 

Can a man like that fail, with his heart full of de- 
light in God's law and with his will determined to do 
what is right? Yes. That is v/hat Rom. vii. teaches 
us. There is something more needed. Not only 
must I delight in the law of God after the inward 



IMPOSSIBLE WITH MAN, POSSIBLE WITH GOD 61 

man, and will what God wills, but I need a divine 
omnipotence to work it in me. And that is what the 
Apostle Paul teaches in Phil, ii.: 

" It is God which worketh in you, both to will and 
to do." 

Note the contrast. In Rom. vii, the regenerate man 
says: "To will is present with me, but to do — I find 
I cannot do. I will, but I cannot perform." But in 
Phil, ii, you have a man who has been led on farther, 
a man who understands that when God has worked 
the renewed will, God will give the power to accom- 
plish what that will desires. Let us receive this as 

THE FIRST GEEAT LESSON IN THE SPIKITUAL LIFE: 

" It is impossible for me, my God; let there be an 
end of the flesh and all its powers, an end of self, 
and let it be my glory to be helpless." 

Praise God for the divine teaching that makes us 
helpless! 

When you thought of absolute sur]»ender to God, 
were you not brought to an end of yourself, and to 
feel that you could see how you actually could live 
as a man absolutely surrendered to God every mo- 
ment of the day — at your table, in your house, in your 
business, in the midst of trials and temptations? I 
pray you learn the lesson now. If you felt you could 
not do it, you are on the right road, if you let your- 
selves be led. Accept that position, and maintain it 
before God: " My heart's desire and delight. Oh God, 
is absolute surrender, but I cannot perform it. It 
is impossible for me to live that life. It is beyond 



62 IMPOSSIBLE WITH MAN, POSSIBLE WITH GOD 

me." Fall down and learn that when you are ut- 
terly helpless, God will come to work in you not only 
to will, but also to do. 

II. 

Now comes the second lesson. " The things which 
are impossible with men are possible with God.'''* 

I said a little while ago that there is many a man 
w^ho has learned the lesson. It is impossible xvith men, 
and then he gives up in helpless despair, and lives a 
wretched Christian life, without joy, or strength, or 
victory. And why? Because he does not humble 
himself to learn that other lesson: With God all 
things are possible. 

Your religious life is every day to be a proof that 
God works impossibilities; your religious life is to be 
a series of impossibilities made possible and actual 
by God's almighty power. That is what the Chris- 
tian needs. He has an almighty God that he wor- 
ships, and he must learn to understand that he does 
not need a little of God's power, but he needs — with 
reverence be it said — the whole of God's omnipo- 
tence to keep him right, and to live like a Christian. 

The whole of Christianity is a work of God's 
omnipotence. Look at the birth of Christ Jesus. 
That was a miracle of divine power, and it v/as said 
to Mary: "With God nothing shall be impossible." 
It was the omnipotence of God. Look at Christ's 
resurrection. We are taught that it was according 
to the exceeding greatness of His mighty power that 
God raised Christ from the dead. 

Every tree must grow on the root from which 
it springs. An oak4ree three hundred years old 



IMPOSSIBLE WITH MAN, POSSIBLE WITH GOD 63 

grows all the time on the one root from which it had 
its beginning. Christianity had its beginning in 
the omnipotence of God, and in every soul it must 
have its continuance in that omnipotence. All the 
possibilities of the higher Christian life have their 
origin in a new apprehension of Christ's power to work 
all God's will in us. 

I want to call upon you now to come and wor- 
ship an almighty God. Have you learned to do it? 
Have you learned to deal so closely with an al- 
mighty God that you know omnipotence is working 
in you? In outward appearance there is often so 
little sign of it. The apostle Paul said: '' I was with 
you in weakness and in fear and in much trembling, 
and . . . my preaching was ... in demon- 
stration of the Spirit and of power." From the hu- 
man side there was feebleness, from the divine side 
there was divine omnipotence. And that is true of 
every godly life; and if we would only learn that lesson 
better, and give a whole-hearted, undivided sur- 
render to it, we should learn what blessedness there 
is in dwelling every hour and every moment with an 
almighty God. Have you ever studied in the Bible 
the attribute of God's omnipotence? You know 
that it was God's omnipotence that created the world, 
and created light out of darkness, and created man. 
But have you studied God's omnipotence in the 
works of redemption? 

Look at Abraham. When God called him to be 
the father of that people out of which Christ was 
to be born, God said to him: " I am God Almighty, 
walk before me and be thou perfect." And God 
trained Abraham to trust Him as the Omnipotent 



64 IMPOSSIBLE WITH MAN, POSSIBLE WITH GOD 

One; and whether it was his going out to a land that 
he knew not, or his faith as a pilgrim amidst the 
thousands of Canaanites, — his faith that said: This 
is my land, — or whether it was his faith in waiting 
twenty-five years for a son in his old age, against all 
hope, or whether it was the raisings up of Isaac from the 
dead on Mount Moriah when he was going to sacrifice 
him, Abraham believed God. He was strong in faith, 
giving glory to God, because he accounted Him who 
had promised able to perform. 

THE CAUSE OF THE WEAKNESS OF YOUR CHRISTIAN 
LIFE 

is that you want to work it out partly, and to let God 
help you. And that cannot be. You must come to 
be utterly helpless, to let God work, and God will 
work gloriously. 

It is this that we need if we are indeed to be work- 
ers for God. I could go through Scripture, and 
prove to you how Moses, when he led Israel out of 
Egypt; how Joshua, when he brought them into the 
land of Canaan; how all God's servants in the Old 
Testament counted upon the omnipotence of God do- 
ing impossibilities. And this God lives to-day, and 
this God is the God of every child of His. And yet 
we are some of us wanting God to give us a little 
help while we do our best, instead of coming to un- 
derstand what God wants, and to say: "I can do 
nothing. God must and will do all." Have you 
said: "In worship, in work, in sanctification, in 
obedience to God, I can do nothing of myself, and so 
my place is to worship the omnipotent God, and to 
believe that He will work in me every moment"? 



IMPOSSIBLE WITH MAN, POSSIBLE WITH GOD 65 

Oh, may God teacli us this! Oh that God would by 
His grace show you vihat a God you have, and to 
what a God you have intrusted yourself, — an omnipo- 
tent God, willing with His whole omnipotence to 
place Himself at the disposal of every child of 
His. Shall we not take the lesson of the Lord Jesus 
and say :" Amen ; the things which are impossible 
with men are possible with God"? 

Remember what w^e have said about Peter, his self= 
confidence, self=power, self-will, and how he came to 
deny his Lord. You feel: "Ah! there is the self- 
life, there is the flesh4ife that rules in me! " And 
now, have you believed that there is deliverance from 
that? Have you believed that Almighty God is able 
so to reveal Christ in your heart, so to let the Holy 
Spirit rule in you, that the self4ife shall not have 
power or dominion over you? Have you coupled the 
two together, and with tears of penitence and with 
deep humiliation and feebleness, cried out: " O God, 
it is impossible to me; man cannot do it, but, glory 
to Thy name, it is possible with God"? Have you 
claimed deliverance? Do it now. Put yourself 
afresh in absolute surrender into the hands of a God 
of infinite love; and as infinite as His love is His 
power to do it. 

But again. We came to the question of absolute 
surrender, and felt that that is the want in the Church 
of Christ, and that is why the Holy Ghost cannot fill 
us, and why we cannot live as people entirely separa- 
ted unto the Holy Ghost; that is why the flesh and 
the self4ife cannot be conquered. We have never 
understood what it is to be absolutely surrendered to 
God as Jesus was. I know that many a one earnest- 



66 IMPOSSIBLE WITH MAN, POSSIBLE WITH GOD 

ly and honestly says: " Amen, I accept the message 
of absolute surrender to God"; and yet thinks: " Will 
that ever be mine? Can I count upon God to make 
me one of whom it shall be said in heaven and on 
earth and in hell, He lives in absolute surrender to 
God?" Brother, sister, " the things which are im- 
possible with men are possible with God." Do be- 
lieve that when He takes charge of you in Christ, it 
is possible for God to make you a man of absolute 
surrender. And God is able to maintain that. He 
is able to let you rise from bed every morning of the 
week with that blessed thought directly or indirectly : 
" I am in God's charge. My God is working out my 
life for me." 

Some are weary of thinking about sanctification. 
You pray, you have longed and cried for it, and yet 
it appeared so far off! The holiness and humility of 
Jesus — you are so conscious of how distant it is. 
Beloved friends, the one doctrine of sanctification that 
is Scriptural and real and effectual is: " The things 
which are impossible with men are possible with 
God." God can sanctify men, and by His almighty 
and sanctifying power every moment God can keep 
them. Oh that we might get a step nearer to our 
God now! Oh that the light of God might shine, 
and that we might know our God better! 

I could go on to speak about the life of Christ in 
us — living like Christ, taking Christ as our Savior 
from sin, and as our life and strength. It is God in 
heaven who can reveal that in you. What does that 
prayer of the Apostle Paul say : " That He would 
grant you according to riches of His glory " — it is 
sure to be something very wonderful if it is accord- 



IMPOSSIBLE WITH MAN, POSSIBLE WITH GOD 67 

ing to the riches of His glory — " to be strengthened 
with might by His Spirit in the inner man"? Do 
you not see that it is an omnipotent God working by 
His omnipotence in the heart of His believing chil- 
dren, so that Christ can become an indwelling Savior? 
You have tried to grasp it and to seize it, and you 
have tried to believe it, and it would not come. It 
was because you had not been brought to believe 
that "the things which are impossible with men are 
possible with God." 

And so, I trust that the word spoken about love 
may have brought many to see that we must have an 
inflowing of love in quite a new way; our heart must 
be filled with life from above, from the Fountain of 
everlasting love, if it is going to overflow all the day; 
then it will be just as natural for us to love our fel- 
low men as it is natural for the lamb to be gentle 
and the wolf to be cruel. Until I am brought to such 
a state that the more a man hates and speaks evil of 
me, the more unlikable and unlovable a man is, I 
shall love him all the more-; until I am brought 
to such a state that the more the obstacles and ha- 
tred and ingratitude, the more can the power of love 
triumph in me — until I am brought to see that, I am 
not saying: " It is impossible with men." But if you 
have been led to say: " This message has spoken to 
me about a love utterly beyond my power; it is ab- 
solutely impossible " — then we can come to God and 
say: "It is possible with Thee." 

Some are crying to God for a great revival. I can 
say that that is the prayer of my heart unceasingly. 
Oh, if God would only revive His believing people ! 
I cannot think, in the first place, of the unconverted 



68 IMPOSSIBLE WITH MAN, POSSIBLE WITH GOD 

formalists of the Church, or of the infidels and skep- 
tics, or of all the wretched and perishing around me; 
my heart prays in the first place: "My God, revive 
Thy Church and people." It is not for nothing that 
there are in thousands of hearts yearnings after holi- 
ness and consecration: it is a forerunner of God's 
power. God works to ivill and then He works to do. 
These yearnings are a witness and a proof that God 
has worked to ivill. Oh, let us in faith believe that 
the omnipotent God will work to do among His peo- 
ple more than we can ask. " Unto Him," Paul said, 
" who is able to do exceeding abundantly above all 
that we ask or think, . . . unto Him be glory." 
Let our hearts say that. Glory to God, the Omni- 
potent One, who can do above what we dare to ask or 
think! 

"The things which are impossible with men are 
possible with God." All round about you there is 
a world of sin and sorrow, and the devil is there. 
But remember, Christ is on the throne, Christ is 
stronger, Christ has conquered, and Christ will con- 
quer. But wait on God. My text casts us down: 
"The things which are impossible loith men^^; but it 
ultimately lifts us up high — ^' QlTq possible ivitli God,'''' 
Get linked to God. Adore and trust Him as the 
Omnipotent one, not only for your own life, but for 
all the souls that are intrusted to you. Never pray 
without adoring His omnipotence: and say: ''Mighty 
God, I claim Thine almightiness.''^ And the answer 
to the prayer will come, and like Abraham you will 
become strong in faith, giving glory to God, because 
you account Him who hath promised able to perform. 



"O WRETCHED MAN THAT I AMI" 

*' O wretched man that I am ! who shall deliver me 
from the body of this death? I thank God through 
Jesus Christ our Lord." — Rom. 7 : 24, 25. 

You know the wonderful place that this text has 
in the wonderful epistle to the Komans. It stands 
here at the end of tlie seventh chapter as the 
gateway into the eighth. In the first sixteen verses 
of the eighth chapter the name of the Holy Spirit is 
found sixteen times; you have there the description 
and promise of the life that a child of God can live 
in the power of the Holy Ghost. This begins in the 
second verse: "The law of the Spirit of life in Christ 
Jesus hath made me free from the law of sin and 
death." From that Paul goes on to speak of the 
great privileges of the child of God, who is to be led 
by the Spirit of God. The gateway into all this is 
in the twenty=fourth verse of the seventh chapter: 

''O wTetched man that I am!" 

There you have the words of a man who has come 
to the end of himself. He has in the previous verses 
described how he had struggled and wrestled in his 
own power to obey the holy law of God, and had 
failed. But in answer to his own question he now 
finds the true answer and cries out: *' I thank God 
through Jesus Christ our Lord." From that he goes 
on to speak of wdiat that deliverance is that he has 
found. 

69 



70 "O WRETCHED MAN THAT I AM'' 

I want from these words to describe the path by 
which a man can be led out of the spirit of bondage 
into the spirit of liberty. You know how distinctly 
it is said: "Ye have not received the spirit of bond- 
age again to fear," We are continually warned that 
this is the great danger of the Christian life, to go 
again into bondage; and I want to describe the path 
by which a man can get out of bondage into the glo- 
rious liberty of the children of God. Rather, I want 
to describe the man himself. 

First, these words are the language of a regenerate 
man; second, of an impotent man; thirds of a 
wretched man; and fourth, of a man on the borders 
of comjjlete liberty. 

In the first place, then, we have here 

THE WORDS OF A REGENERATE MAN. 

You know how much evidence there is of that 
from the fourteenth verse of the chapter on to the 
twenty^hird. " It is no more I that do it, but sin 
that dwelleth in me": that is the language of a re- 
generate man, a man who knows that his heart and 
nature have been renewed, and that sin is now a 
power in him that is not himself. " I delight in the 
law of the Lord after the inward man": that again is 
the language of a regenerate man. He dares to say 
when he does evil: "It is no more I that do it, but 
sin that dwelleth in me." It is of great importance 
to understand this. 

In the first two great sections of the epistle, Paul 
deals with justification and sanctification. In deal- 
ing with justification, he lays the fou'idation of the 
doctrine in the teaching about sin, not in the singu- 



"O WRETCHED MAN THAT I AM'' 71 

lar, *'sm," but in the plural, "sins" — the actual trans- 
gressions. In the second part of the fifth ciiapter ho 
begins to deal with sin, not as actual transgression, 
but as a power. Just imagine what a loss it would 
have been to us if we had not this second half of the 
seventh chapter of the Epistle to the Komans, if Paul 
had omitted in his teaching this vital question of the 
sinfulness of the believer. We should have missed 
the question w^e all want answered as to sin in the 
believer. What is the answer? The regenerate man 
is one in whom the will has been renewed, and who 
can say: "I delight in the law of God after the in- 
ward man." 

But secondly: The 7'egenercde man is also 

AN IMPOTENT MAN, 

Here is the great mistake made by many Christian 
people. They think that when there is a renewed 
will it is enough; but that is not the case. This re- 
generate man tells us: ^' I ivill to do what is good, 
but the power to perform I find not." How often 
people tell us that if you set yourself determinedly 
you can perform what you will. But this man was 
as determined as any man can be, and yet he made 
the confession: "To will is i^resent with me; but 
how to perform that which is good, I find not." 

But, you ask, how is it God makes a regenerate 
man utter such a confession, with a right will, with a 
heart that longs to do good, and longs to do its very 
utmost to love God? 

Let us look at this question. What has God given 
us our will for? Had the angels who fell, in their 
own will, the strength to stand? Verily, no. The 



72 " O WRETCHED MAN THAT I AM'' 

will of the creature is nothing but an empty vessel in 
which the power of God is to be made manifest. 
The creature must seek in God all that it is to be. 
You have it in the second chapter of the Epistle to 
the Philippians, and you have it here also, that God's 
work is to work in us both to will and to do of His 
good pleasure. Here is a man who appears to say: 
"God has not worked to do in me." But we are 
taught that God works both to will and to do. How 
is the apparent contradiction to be reconciled? 

You will find that in this passage (Eom. 7:6-25) 
the name of the Holy Spirit does not occur once, nor 
does the name of Christ occur. The man is wrest- 
ling and struggling to fulfil God's law. In the 
chapter, instead of the Holy Spirit and of Christ, the 
law is mentioned nearly twenty times. It shows a 
believer doing his very best to obey the law of God 
with his regenei'ate will. Not only this; but you will 
find the little words, " I," " me," " my," occur more 
than forty times. It is the regenerate "I" in its 
impotence seeking to obey the law w^ithout being 
filled with the Spirit. This is the experience of al- 
most every saint. After conversion a man begins to 
do his best, and he fails; but if we are brought into 
the full light we need fail no longer. Nor need we 
fail at all if we have received the Spirit in His ful- 
ness at conversion. 

God allows that failure that the regenerate man 
should be taught his own utter impotence, It is in 
the course of this struggle that there comes to us this 
sense of our utter sinfulness. It is God's way of 
dealing with us. He allows that man to strive to 
fulfil the law that, as he strives and wrestles, he may 



« WRETCHED MAN THAT I AM" 73 

be brought to this: " I am a regenerate child of God, 
but I am utterly helpless to obey His law." See 
what strong words are used all through the chapter 
to describe this condition: " I am carnal, sold under 
sin"; "I see another law in my members bringing 
me into captivity"; and last of all, " O wretched man 
that I am! who shall deliver me from the body of 
this death?" This believer who bows here in deep 
contrition is utterly unable to obey the law of God. 

But thirdly: Not only is tJie mem lolio makes this 
confession a regenerate and an impotent man, hut 
he is also 

A WRETCHED MAN. 

He is utterly unhappy and miserable; and what 
is it that makes him so utterly miserable? It is be- 
cause God has given him a nature that loves Him- 
self. He is deeply wretched because he feels he is not 
obeying his God. He says, with brokenness of heart: 
'•It is not I that do it, but I am under the awful power 
of sin, which is holding me down. It is I, and 
yet not I: alas! alas! it is myself; so closely am I 
bound up with it, and so closely is it intertwined 
with my very nature." Blessed be God when a man 
learns to say: "O wretched man that I am!" from 
the depth of his heart. He is on the way to the 
eighth chapter of Romans. 

There are many who make this confession a pil- 
low for sin. They say that Paul had to confess his 
weakness and helplessness in this way, what are they 
that they should try to do better? So the call to ho- 
liness is quietly set aside. Would God that every 
one of us had learned to say these words in the very 



74 "0 WRETCHED MAN THAT I AM'' 

spirit in which they are written here! When we 
hear sin spoken of as the abominable thing that God 
hates, do not many of us wince before the word? 
Would that all Christians who go on sinning and 
sinning would take this verse to heart. If ever you 
utter a sharp word say: *' O wretched man that I 
am!" And every time you lose your temper, kneel 
down and understand . that it never was meant by 
God that this w^as to be the state in which His child 
should remain. Would God that we w^ould take 
this word into our daily life, and say it every time we 
are touched about our own honor, and every time we 
say sharp things, and every time W'e sin against the 
Lord God, and against the Lord Jesus Christ in His 
humility, and in His obedience, and in His self-sac- 
rifice! Would to God you could forget everything 
else, and cry out: "O wretched man that I am! who 
shall deliver me from the body of this death? " 

Why should you say this wdienever you commit 
sin? Because it is when a man is brought to this 
confession that deliverance is at hand. 

And remember it w^as not only the sense of being 
impotent and taken captive that made him wretched, 
but it was above all the sense of sinning against his 
God. The law was doing its work, making sin ex- 
ceedliKj sinful in his sight. The thought .of contin- 
ually grieving God became utterly unbearable — it was 
this brought forth the piercing cry: "O wretched 
man! " As long as we talk and reason about our im- 
potence and our failure, and only try to find out 
what Romans vii. means, it will profit us but little; 
but when once everij sin gives new intensity to the 
sense of wretchedness, and we feel our whole state as 



" O WRETCHED MAN THAT I AM" 75 

one of not only helplessness, but actual exceeding 
einfulness, we shall be pressed not only to ask: 
" Who shall deliver us?" but to cry: '' I thank God 
through Jesus Christ my Lord." 

Fourthly: When a man comes here he is 

ON THE VERY BRINK OF DELIVERANCE. 

The man has tried to obey the beautiful law of 
God. He has loved it, he has wept over his sin, 
he has tried to conquer, he has tried to overcome 
fault after fault, but every time he has ended in fail- 
ure. 

What did he mean by " the body of this death " ? 
Did he mean, my body when I die? Verily no. In 
the eighth chapter you have the answer to this ques- 
tion in the words: " If ye through the Spirit do mor- 
tify the deeds of the body, ye shall live." That is 
the body of death from which he is seeking deliver- 
ance. 

And now he is on the brink of deliverance! In the 
twenty third verse of the seventh chapter we have 
the w'ords: "I see another law in my members, war- 
ring against the law of my mind, and bringing me 
into captivity to the law of sin which is in my mem- 
bers." Itis a captive that cries: ''O wretched man 
that I am ! who shall deliver me from the body of this 
death?" He is a man w'ho feels himself bound. 
But look to the contrast in the second verse of the 
eighth chapter: "The law of the Spirit of life in 
Christ Jesus hath made me free from the law of sin 
and death." That is the deliverance through Jesus 
Christ our Lord; the liberty to the cai^tive which 
the Spirit brings. Can you keep captive any 



76 "O WRETCHED MAN THAT I AM" 

longer a man made free by the " law of the Spirit of 
life in Christ Jesus" ? 

But you say, the regenerate man, had not he the 
Spirit of Jesus when he spoke in the sixth chapter? 
Yes, hut he did not knoio ivhat the Holy Spirit could 
do for him. 

God does not work by His Spirit as He works by 
a blind force in nature. He leads His people on as 
reasonable, intelligent beings, and therefore when 
He wants to give us that Holy Spirit whom He has 
promised. He brings us first to the end of self, to the 
conviction that though we have been striving to obey 
the law, we have failed. When we have come to the 
end of that, then He shows us that in the Holy 
Spirit we have the power of obedience, the power 
of victory, and the power of real holiness. 

God works to will, and He is ready to work to do, 
but, alas! many Christians misunderstand this. They 
think because they have the will it is enough, and 
that now they are able to do. This is not so. The 
new will is a permanent gift, an attribute of the new 
nature. The power to do is not a permanent gift, 
but must be each moment received from the Holy 
Spirit. It is the man who is conscious of his oion 
impotence as a believer who will learn that by the 
Holy Spirit he can live a holy life. This man is on 
the brink of that great deliverance; the way has 
been prepared for the glorious eighth chapter. I now 
ask tliis solemn question: Where are you living? Is 
it with you, '' O wretched man that I am! who shall 
deliver me?" with now and then a little experience 
of the power of the Holy Spirit? or is it, " I thank 



"O WRETCHED MAN THAT I AM'' 77 

Grod through Jesus Christ! The law of the Spirit 
hath set me free from the law of sin and of death"? 

What the Holy Spirit does is to give the victory. 
"If ye through the Spirit do mortify the deeds of 
the flesh, ye shall live." It is the Holy Ghost who 
does this — the third Person of the Godhead. He it 
is who, when the heart is opened wide to receive Him, 
comes in and reigns there, and mortifies the deeds of 
the body, day by day, hour by hour, and moment by 
moment. 

I want to bring this to a point. Remember, dear 
friend, what we need is to come to decision and ac- 
tion. There are in Scripture two very dilBPerent sorts 
of Christians. The Bible speaks in Romans, CoiHn- 
thians and Galatians about yielding to the flesh; and 
that is the life of tens of thousands of believers. All 
their want of joy in the Holy Ghost, and their want 
of the liberty He gives, is just owing to the flesh. 
The Spirit is within them, but the flesh rules the 
life. To be led by the Spirit of God is what they 
need. Would God that I could make every child of 
His realize what it means that the Everlasting God 
has given His dear Son, Christ Jesus, to watch over 
you every day, and that what you have to do is to trust; 
and that the work of the Holy Spirit is to enable 
you every moment to remember Jesus, and to trust 
Him! The Spirit has come to keep the link with 
Him unbroken every moment. Praise God for the 
Holy Ghost! We are so accustomed to think of the 
Holy Spirit as a luxury, something for special times, 
or for special ministers and men. But the Holy 
Spirit is necessary for every believer, every moment 



78 " O WRETCHED MAN THAT 1 AM'' 

of the day. Praise God you have Him, and that He 
gives you the full experience of the deliverance in 
Christ, as He makes you free from the power of sin. 

Who longs to have the power and the liberty of the 
Holy Spirit? Oh, brother, bow before God in one 
final cry of despair: 

"O God, must I go on sinning this way forever? 
Who shall deliver me, O wretched man that I am! 
from the body of this death?" 

Are you ready to sink before God, in that cry, and 
seek the power of Jesus to dwell and work in you? 
Are you ready to say: *' I thank God through Jesus 
Christ"? 

What good does it do that we go to church or at-^ 
tend conventions, that we study our Bibles and pray, 
unless our lives are filled with the Holy Spirit? 
That is what God wants; and nothing else will ena- 
ble us to live a life of power and peace. You know 
that when a minister or parent is using the cate- 
chism, when a question is asked an answer is ex- 
pected. Alas! how many Christians are content with 
the question put here: "O wretched man that I ami 
who shall deliver me iTom the body of this death ? " 
but never give the answer. Instead of answering, 
they are silent. Instead of saying: " I thank God 
through Jesus Christ our Lord," they are for ever re- 
peating the question without the answer. If you 
want the path to the full deliverance of Christ, and 
the liberty of the Spirit, the glorious liberty of the 
children of God, take it through the seventh chapter 
of Romans; and then say: "I thank God through 
Jesus Christ our Lord." Be not content to remain 



"O WRETCHED MAN THAT I AM'' 79 

ever groaning, but say: "I, a wretched man, thank 
God, through Jesus Christ. Even though I do not 
see it all, I am going to praise God." 

There is deliverance, there is the liberty of the 
Holy Spirit. The kingdom of God is "joy in the 
Holy Ghost." 



"HAVING BEGUN IN THE SPIRIT." 

The words from which I wish to address you, you 
will find in the Epistle to the Galatians, the third 
chapter, at the third verse; let us read the second 
verse also: " This only would I learn of you, Eeceived 
ye the Spirit by the works of the law, or by the hear- 
ing of faith? Are ye so foolish?" And then comes 
my text — " Having begun in the Spirit, are ye now 
made perfect by the flesh?" 

When we sj)eak of the quickening or the deepen- 
ing or the strengthening of the spiritual life, we are 
thinking of something that is feeble and wrong and 
sinful; and it a great thing to take our place before 
God with the confession: 

" Oh God, our spiritual life is not what it should 
be!" 

May God work that in your heart, reader. 

As we look round about on the church we see so 
many indications of feebleness and of failure, and of 
sin, and of shortcoming, that we are compelled to ask: 
Why is it? Is there any necessity for the church of 
Christ to be living in such a low state? Or is it ac- 
tually possible that God's people should be living 
always in the joy and strength of their God? 

Every believing heart must answer: It is possible. 

Then comes the great question: Why is it, how is 
it to be accounted for, that God's church as a whole 
is so feeble, and that the great majority of Christians 

80 



*' HAVING BEGUN IN THE SPIRIT^' 81 

are not living up to their privileges? There must be 
a reason for it. Has God not given Christ His Al- 
mighty Son to be the Keeper of every believer, to 
make Christ an ever-present reality, and to impart 
and communicate to us all that we have in Christ? 
God has given His Son, and God has given His 
Spirit. How is it that believers do not live up to 
their privileges? 

We find in more than one of the epistles a very 
solemn answer to that question. There are epistles, 
such as the first to the Thessalonians, where Paul 
writes to the Christians, in effect: "I want you to 
grow, to abound, to increase more and more." They 
were young, and there were things lacking in their 
faith, but their state was so far satisfactory, and gave 
him great joy, and he writes time after time: "I 
pray God that you may abound more and more; I 
write to you to increase more and more." But there 
are other epistles where he takes a very different 
tone, especially the epistles to the Corinthians and 
the Galatians, and he tells them in many different 
ways what the one reason was, that they were not liv- 
ing as Christians ought to live; many were under the 
power of the flesh. My text is one example. He re- 
minds them that by the preaching of faith they had 
received the Holy Spirit. He had preached Christ 
to them; they had accepted that Christ, and had re- 
ceived the Holy Spirit in power. But what hap- 
pened? Having begun in the Spirit, they tried to 
perfect the work that the Spirit had begun, in the 
flesh by their own effort. We find the same teach- 
ing in the epistles to the Corinthians. 

Now, we have here a solemn discovery of what the 



82 ''HAVING BEGUN IN THE SPIRIT" 

great want is in the Church of Christ. God has 
called the Church of Christ to live in the power of 
the Holy Spirit, and the church is living for the most 
part in the power of human flesh, and of will and 
energy and effort apart from the Spirit of God. I 
doubt not that that is the case with many individual 
believers; and oh, if God will use me to give you a 
message from Him, my one message will be this: 
" If the church will return to acknowledge that the 
Holy Spirit is her strength and her help, and if the 
church will return to give up everything, and wait 
upon God to be filled with the Spirit, her days of 
beauty and gladness will return, and we shall see the 
glory of God revealed amongst us." This is my 
message to every individual believer: "Nothing will 
help you unless you come to understand that you must 
live every day under the power of the Holy Ghost." 

God wants you to be a living vessel in whom the 
power of the Spirit is to be manifested every hour 
and every moment of your life, and God will enable 
you to be that. 

Now let us try and learn that this word to the Ga- 
latians teaches us — some very simple thoughts. It 
shows us how ( 1 ) the heginning of the Christian life 
is receiving the Holy Spirit. It shows us (2) what 
great danger there is of forgetting that ive are to live 
hy the Spirit, and not live after the flesh. It shows 
us (3) what are the fruits and the proofs of our 
seeking perfection in the flesh. And then it suggests 
to us (4) the way of deliverance from this state. 

I. 

First of all, Paul says: " Having begun in the Spirit J^ 



''HAVING BEGUN IN THE SPIRIT'' 



Remember, the Apostle not only preached justifica- 
tion by faith, but he preached something more. He 
preached this — the Epistle is full of it — that justified 
men cannot live but by the Holy Spirit, and that 
therefore God gives to every justified man the Holy 
Spirit to seal him. The Apostle says to them in 
effect more than once: 

" How did you receive the Holy Spirit? Was it 
by the preaching of the law, or by the preaching of 
faith?" 

He could point back to that time when there had 
been a mighty revival under his teaching. The 
power of God had been manifested, and the Galatians 
were compelled to confess: 

"Yes, we have got the Holy Ghost: accepting 
Christ by faith, by faith we received the Holy 
Spirit." 

Now, it is to be feared that there are many Chris- 
tians who hardly know that when they believed they 
received the Holy Ghost. A great many Christians 
can say: "I received pardon and I received peace." 
But if you were to ask them: "Have you received the 
Holy Ghost? " they would hesitate, and many, if they 
were to say: "Yes," would say it with hesitation; and 
they would tell you that they hardly knew what it 
was, since that time, to walk in the power of the Holy 
Spirit. Let us try and take hold of this great trath: 
The beginning of the true Christian life is to receive 
the Holy Ghost. And the work of every Christian 
minister is what was the work of St. Paul — to remind 
his people that they received the Holy Ghost, and 
must live according to His guidance and in His 
power. 



84: " HAVING BEGUN IN THE SPIRIT'' 

If those Galatians who received the Holy Spirit in 
power were tempted to go astray by that terrible dan- 
ger of perfecting in the flesh what had been begun in 
the Spirit, how much more danger do those Chris- 
tians run who hardly ever know that they have re- 
ceived the Holy Spirit, or who, if they know it as a 
matter of belief, hardly ever think of it and hardly 
ever praise God for it! 

11. 

But now look, in the second place, at the great dan- 
ger. 

You all know what shunting is on a railway. A 
locomotive with its train may be run in a certain 
direction, and the points at some place may not be 
properly opened or closed, and unobservingly it is 
shunted off to the right or to the left. And if that 
takes place, for instance, on a dark night, the train 
goes in the w^rong direction, and the people might 
never know it until they have gone some distance. 

And just so God gives Christians the Holy Spirit 
with this intention, that every day all their life should 
be lived in the power of the Spirit. A man cannot 
live one hour a godly life unless by the power of the 
Holy Ghost. He may live a proper, consistent life, 
as people call it, an irreproachable life, a life of virtue 
and diligent service; but to live a life acceptable to 
God, in the enjoyment of God's salvation and God's 
love, to live and walk in the power of the new life — 
he cannot do it unless he be guided by the Holy 
Spirit every day and every hour. 

But now listen to the danger. The Galatians received 
the Holy Ghost, but what was begun by the Spirit 
they tried to perfect in the flesh. How? They fell 



" HA VING BEG UN IN THE SPIRI r " 85 

back again under Judaising teachers who told them 
they must be circumcised. They began to seek their 
religion in external observances. And so Paul uses 
that expression about those teachers who had them 
circumcised, that " they sought to glory in their 
flesh." 

You sometimes hear the expression used, religious 
flesh. What is meant by that? It is simply an ex- 
pression made to give utterance to this thought: My 
human nature and my human will and my human 
effort can be very active in religion, and after being 
converted, and after receiving the Holy Ghost, I may 
begin in my own strength to try to serve God. 

I may be very diligent and doing a great deal, and 
yet all the time it is more the work of human flesh 
than of God's Spirit. What a solemn thought, that 
man can, without noticing it, be shunted off from the 
line of the Holy Ghost on to the line of the flesh; 
that he can be most diligent and make great sacrifices, 
and yet it is all in the power of the human will! Ah, 
the great question for us to ask of God in self-exam- 
ination is that we may be shown whether our religious 
life is lived more in the power of the flesh than in the 
power of the Holy Spirit. A man may be a preacher, 
he may work most diligently in his ministry, a man 
may be a Christian worker, and others may tell of 
him that he makes great sacrifices, and yet you can 
feel there is a want about it. You feel that he is not 
a spiritual man; there is no spirituality about his life. 
How many Christians there are about whom no one 
would ever think of saying: " What a spiritual man 
he is! " Ah! there is the weakness of the Church of 
Christ. It is all in that one wovd— flesh. 



86 "HAVING BEGUN IN THE SPIRIT" 

Now, the flesli may manifest itself in many ways. 
It may be manifested in fleshly wisdom. My mind 
may be most active about religion. I may preach or 
write or think or meditate, and delight in being occu- 
pied with things in God's Book and in God's King- 
dom; and yet the power of the Holy Ghost may be 
markedly absent. I fear that if you take the preach- 
ing throughout the Church of Christ and ask why 
there is, alas! so little converting power in the preach- 
ing of the Word, why there is so much work and 
often so little result for eternity, why the Word has 
so little power to build up believers in holiness and 
in consecration, — the answer will come: It is the 
absence of the power of the Holy Ghost. And why is 
this? There can be no other reason but that the 
flesh and human energy have taken the place that the 
Holy Ghost ought to have. That was true of the Gal- 
atians, it was true of the Corinthians. You know 
Paul said to them: "I cannot speak to you as to 
spiritual men; you ought to be spiritual men, but you 
are carnal," And you know how often in the course 
of his epistles he had to reprove and condemn them 
for strife and for divisions. 

III. 

A third thought: What are the proof s or indica- 
tions that a church like the Galatians, or a Christian, 
is serving God in the power of the flesh — is perfect- 
incjin the flesh what ivas begun in the Spirit? 

The answer is very easy. Religious self-effort 
always ends in sinful flesh. What was the state of 
those Galatians? Striving to be justified by the 
works of the law. And yet they were quarreling and 



''HAVING BEGUN IN THE SPIRIT" 87 

in danger of devouring one another. Count up the 
expressions that the Apostle uses to indicate their 
want of love, and you will find more than twelve — 
envy, jealousy, bitterness, strife, and all sorts of ex- 
pressions. Read in the fourth and fifth chapters 
what he says about that. You see how they tried to 
serve God in their own strength, and they failed ut- 
terly. All this religious effort resulted in failure. 
The power of sin and the sinful flesh got the better 
of them, and their whole condition was one of the 
saddest that could be thought of. 

This comes to us with unsjDeakable solemnity. 
There is a complaint everywhere in the Christian 
Church of the want of a high standard of integrity 
and godliness, even among the professing members of 
Christian churches. I remember a sermon which I 
heard preached by Dr. Dykes on commercial moral- 
ity, and he spoke of what was to be found in London. 
And oh, if we speak not only of the commercial mo- 
rality or immorality that is to be found in London, but 
if we go into the homes of Christians, and if we 
think of the life to which God has called His children, 
and which He enables them to live by the Holy 
Ghost, and if we think of how much, nevertheless, 
there is of unlovingness and temper and sharpness 
and bitterness, and if we think how much there is 
very often of strife amongst the members of churches, 
and how much there is of envy and jealousy and sen- 
sitiveness and pride, then we are compelled to say: 
" Where are marks of the presence of the Spirit of 
the Lamb of God? " Wanting, sadly wanting! 

Many people speak of these things as though they 
were the natural result of our feebleness, and cannot 



88 ''HAVING BEGUN IN THE SPIRIT'' 

well be helped. Many people speak of these things 
as sins, yet have given up the hope of conquering 
them. Many people siDeak of these things in the 
Church around them, and do not see the least pros- 
pect of ever having the things changed. There is no 
prospect until there comes a radical change, until the 
Church of God begins to see that every sin in the be- 
liever comes from the flesh, from a fleshly life amidst 
our religious activities, from a striving in self=effort 
to serve God. Until we learn to make confession, 
and until we begin to see v/e must somehow or other 
get God's Spirit in power back to His Church, we 
must fail. Where did the Church begin in Pente- 
cost? There they began in the Spirit. But, alas, 
how the Church of the next century went off into the 
flesh! They thought to perfect the Church in the 
flesh. 

Do not let us think, because the blessed Reforma- 
tion restored the great doctrine of justification by 
faith, that the power of the Holy Spirit was then 
fully restored. If it is our faith that God is going to 
have mercy on His Church in these last ages, it will 
be because the doctrine and the truth about the Holy 
Spirit will not only be studied, but sought after with 
a whole heart; and not only because that truth will 
be sought after, but because ministers and congrega- 
tions will be found bowing before God in deep abase- 
ment with one cry: " We have grieved God's Spirit; 
we have tried to be Christian churches with as little 
as possible of God's Spirit; we have not sought to be 
churches filled with the Holy Ghost." 

All the feebleness in the Church is owing to the 
refusal of the Church to obey its God. 



HAVING BEGUN IN THE SPIRIT' 



And why is that so? I know your answer. You 
say: " We are too feeble and too helpless, and we try 
to obey, and we vow to obey, but somehow we fail." 

Ah, yes; you fail because you do not accept the 
strength of God, God alone can work out His will 
in you. You cannot work out God's will, but His 
Holy Spirit can; and until the Church, until believers 
grasp this, and cease trying by human effort to do 
God's will, and wait upon the Holy Spirit to come 
with all His omnipotent and enabling power, the 
Church will never be what God wants her to be, and 
what God is willing to make of her. 

IV. 

I come now to my last thought, the question : What 
is the ivay to restoration f 

Beloved friend, the answer is simple and easy. If 
that train has been shunted off, there is nothing for 
it but to come back to the point at which it was led 
away. The Galatians had no other way in returning 
but to come back to where they had gone wrong, to 
come back from all religious effort in their own 
strength, and from seeking anything by their ow^n 
work, and to yield themselves humbly to the Holy 
Spirit. There is no other way for us as individuals. 

Is there any brother or sister whose heart is con- 
scious: "Alas! my life knows but little of the iDower 
of the Holy Ghost " ? I come to you with God's 
message that you can have no conception of what 
your life would be in the power of the Holy Spirit. 
It is too high and too blessed and too wonderful, but 
I bring you the message that just as truly as the ever- 
lasting Son of God came to this world and wrought 



90 ''HAVING BEGUN IN THE SPIRIT" 

His wonderful works, that just as truly as on Calvary 
He died and wrought out your redemption by His 
precious blood, so, just as truly, can the Holy Spirit 
come into your heart that with His divine power He 
may sanctify you and enable you to do God's blessed 
will, and fill your heart with joy and with strength. 
But, alas! we have forgotten, we have grieved, we 
have dishonored the Holy Spirit, and He has not 
been able to do His work. But I bring you the mes- 
sage: The Father in heaven loves to fill His children 
with His Holy Spirit. God longs to give each one 
individually, separately, the power of the Holy Spirit 
for daily life. The command comes to us individual- 
ly, unitedly. God wants us as His children to arise 
and place our sins before Him, and to call upon Him 
for mercy. Oh, are ye so foolish? having begun in 
the Spirit, are ye perfecting in the flesh that which 
was begun in the Spirit? Let us bow in shame, and 
confess before God how our fleshly religion, our self= 
effort, and self=confidence, have been the cause of 
every failure. 

I have often been asked by young Christians: " Why 
is it that I fail so? I did so solemnly vow with my 
whole heart, and did desire to serve God; why have I 
failed? " 

To such I always give the one answer: "My dear 
friend, you are trying to do in your own strength 
what Christ alone can do in you." 

And when they tell me: "I am sure I knew Christ 
alone could do it, I was not trusting in myself," my 
answer always is: 

" You were trusting in yourself or you could not 



''HAVING BEGUN IN THE SPIRIT'' 91 

have failed. If you had trusted Christ, He could not 
fail." 

Oh, this perfecting in the flesh what was begun in 
the Spirit runs far deex^er through us than we know. 
Let us ask God to discover to us that it is only when 
we are brought to utter shame and emptiness that we 
shall be prepared to receive the blessing that comes 
from on high. 

And so I come with these two questions. Are you 
living, beloved brother^minister — I ask it of every 
minister of the gospel — are you living under the 
power of the Holy Ghost? Are you living as an 
anointed, Spirit^filled man in your ministry and your 
life before God? O brethren, our place is an awful 
one. We have to show people what God will do for 
us, not in our words and teaching, but in our life. 
God help us to do it! 

I ask it of every member of Christ's Church and of 
every believer: Are you living a life under the 
power of the Holy Spirit day by day, or are you at- 
tempting to live without that ? Remember you cannot. 
Are you consecrated, given up to the Spirit to work 
in you and to live in you? Oh, come and confess 
every failure of temper, every failure of tongue how- 
ever small, every failure owing to the absence of the 
Holy Spirit and the presence of the power of self. 
Are you consecrated, are you given up to the Holy 
Spirit? 

If your answer be No, then I come with a second 
question — Are you willing to be consecrated? Are 
you willing to give up yourself to the power of the 
Holy Spirit? 

You know very well, I trust, that 



92 ''HAVING BEGUN IN THE SPIRIT" 



THE HUMAN SIDE OF CONSECRATION 

will not help you. I may consecrate myself a hun- 
dred times with all the intensity of my being, and 
that will not help me. What will help me is this — 
that God from heaven accepts and seals the conse- 
cration. 

And now are you willing to give yourselves up to 
the Holy Spirit? You can do it now. A great deal 
may still be dark and dim, and beyond what we un- 
derstand, and you may feel nothing; but come. God 
alone can effect the change. God alone, who gave 
us the Holy Spirit, can restore the Holy Spirit in 
power into our life. God alone can " strengthen us 
with might by His Spirit in the inner man." And 
to every w^aiting heart that will make the sacrifice, 
and give up everything, and give time to cry and 
pray to God, the answer will come. The blessing is 
not far off. Our God delights to help us. He will 
enable us to perfect, not in the flesh, but in the 
Spirit, what was begun in the Spirit. 



KEPT BY THE POWER OF GOD. 

The words from which I speak, you will find in 1 
Pet. i.o. The third and fourth verses are: "Bless- 
ed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, 
who, . . . hath begotten us again unto a lively 
hope by the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the 
dead; to an inheritance incorruptible ... re- 
served in heaven for you " (and then the fifth verse), 
" who are kept by the power of God through faith 
unto salvation. The words of my text are: " Kept 
by the power of God through faith." 

There we have two wonderful, blessed truths about 
the keeping by which a believer is kept unto salva- 
tion. One truth is, Kept by the power of God; and 
the other truth is. Kept through faith. We should 
look at the two sides — at God's side and His almighty 
power; offered to us to be our Keeper every moment 
of the day; and at the human side, we having nothing 
to do but in faith to let God do His keeping work. 
We are begotten again to an inheritance kept in 
heaven for us; and we are kept here on earth by the 
power of God. We see there is a double keeping — 
the inheritance kept for me in heaven, and I on earth 
kept for the inheritance there. 

Now, as to the first part of this keeping, there is 
no doubt and no question. God keeps the inherit- 
ance in heaven very wonderfully and perfectly, and 
it is waiting there most safely. And the same God 

93 



94 KEPT BY THE POWER OF GOD 

keeps me for the inheritance. That is what I want 
to understand. 

You know it is very foolish of a father to take 
great trouble to have an inheritance for his children, 
and to keep it for them, if he does not keep them for 
it. What would you think of a man spending his 
whole time and making every sacrifice to amass mon- 
ey, and as he gets his tens of thousands, you ask him 
why it is that he sacrifices himself so, and his answer 
is: "I want to leave my children a large inheritance, 
and I am keeping it for them " — if you were then to 
hear that that man takes no trouble to educate his 
children, that he allows them to run upon the street 
wild, and to go on in paths of sin and ignorance and 
folly, what would you think of him? Would not you 
say: "Poor man! he is keeping an inheritance for his 
children, but he is not keeping or preparing his chil- 
dren for the inheritance"! And there are so many 
Christians who think: "My God is keeping the in- 
heritance for me"; but they cannot believe: "My 
God is keeping me for that inheritance." The same 
power, the same love, the same God doing the double 
work. 

Now, I want to speak about a work God does upon 
us — keeping us for the inheritance. I have already 
said that we have two very simple truths: the one 
the divine side — we are kept by the power of God; 
the other, the human side — ice are kept through 
faith. 

I. 

First, look at the divine side — 



KEPT BY THE POWER OF GOD 95 



KEPT BY THE POWER OF GOD. 

Think, first of all, that this keeping is all-inclusive. 

What is kept? You are kept. How much of you? 
The whole being. Does God keep one part of you 
and not another? No. Some people have an idea 
that this is a sort of vague, general keeping, and that 
God will keep them in such a way that when they die 
they will get to heaven. But they do not apply that 
word kept to everything in their being and nature. 
And yet that is what God wants. 

Here I have a watch. Suppose that this watch 
had been borrowed from a friend, and he said to me: 

" When you go to Europe I will let you take it 
with you, but mind you keep it safely and bring it 
back." 

And suppose I injured the watch, and had the 
hands broken, and the face defaced, and some of the 
wheels and springs spoiled, and took it back in that 
condition, and handed it to my friend, he would say: 

" Ah, but I gave you that watch on condition that 
you would keep it." 

" Have I not kept it? There is the watch." 

" But I did not want you to keep it in that gen- 
eral way, so that you should bring me back only the 
shell of the watch, or the remains. I expected you 
to keep every part of it." 

And so God does not want to keep us in this gen- 
eral way, so that at the last, somehow or other, we 
shall be saved as by fire, and just get into heaven. 
But the keeping power and the love of God applies 
to every particular of our being. 



96 KEPT BY THE POWER OF GOD 

There are some people who think God will keep 
them in spiritual things, but not in temporal things. 
This latter, they say, lies outside of His line. Now, 
God sends you to work in the world, but He did not 
say: " I must now leave you to go and earn your own 
money, and to get your livelihood for yourself." He 
knows you are not able to keep yourself. But God 
says: "My child, there is no work you are to do, 
and no business in which you are engaged, and not a 
cent which you are to spend, but I, your Father, will 
take that up into my keeping." God not only cares 
for the spiritual, but for the temporal also. The 
greater part of the life of many people must be spent, 
sometimes eight or nine or ten hours a day, amid the 
temptations and distractions of business; but God will 
care for you there. The keeping of God includes all. 

There are other people who think: "Ah! in time of 
trial God keeps me, but in times of prosperity I do 
not need His keeping; then I forget Him and let Him 
go." Others, again, think the very opposite. They 
think: "In time of prosperity, when things are 
smooth and quiet, 1 am able to cling to God, but 
when heavy trials come, somehow or other my will 
rebels, and God does not keep me then." 

Now, I bring you the message that in prosperity as 
in adversity, in the sunshine as in the dark, your 
God is ready to keep you all the time. 

Then again, there are others who think of this 
keeping thus: " God will keep me from doing very 
great wickedness, but there are small sins I cannot 
expect God to keep me from. There is the sin of 
temper. I cannot expect God to conquer that." 

When you hear of some man who has been tempted 



KEPT BY THE POWER OF GOD 97 

and gone astray or fallen into drunkenness or mur- 
der, you thank God for His keeping power. 

" I might have done the same as that man," you 
say, " if God had not kept me." And you believe He 
kept you from drunkenness and murder. 

And why do you not believe that God can keep 
you from outbreaks of temper? You thought that 
this was of less importance; you did not remember 
that the great commandment of the New Testament 
is — " Love one another as I have loved you." And 
when your temper and hasty judgment and sharp 
words came out, you sinned against the highest law — 
the law of God's love. And yet you say: " God will 
not, God cannot" — no, you will not say, God cannot; 
but you say, " God does not keep me from that." 
You perhaps say: "He can; but there is something 
in me that cannot attain to it, and which God does 
not take away." 

I want to ask you. Can believers live a holier life 
than is generally lived? Can believers experience 
the keeping power of God all the day, to keej) them 
from sin? Can believers be kept in fellowship with 
God? And I bring you a message from the Word of 
God, in these words: Kept by the poiver of God. 
There is no qualifying clause to them. The mean- 
ing is, that if you will intrust yourself entirely and 
absolutely to the omnipotence of God, 

HE WILL DELIGHT TO KEEP YOU. 

Some people think that they never can get so far 
as that every word of their mouth should be to the 
glory of God. But it is what God wants of them, it 
is what God expects of them. God is willing to set 



98 KEPT BY THE POWER OF GOD 

a watch at the door of their mouth, and if God will 
do that, cannot He keep their tongue and their lips? 
He can; and that is what God is going to do for 
them that trust Him. God's keeping is all=inclusive, 
and let every one who longs to live a holy life think 
out all their needs, and all their weaknesses, and all 
their shortcomings, and all their sins, and say delib- 
erately: "Is there any sin that my God can not keep 
me from?" And the heart will have to answer: "No; 
God can help me from every sin." 

Secondly, if you want to understand this keeping, 
remember that it is not only an all4nclusive keeping, 
but it is 

AN ALMIGHTY KEEPING. 

I want to get that truth burned into my soul, I 
want to worship God until my whole heart is filled 
with the thought of His omnipotence. God is al- 
mighty, and the Almighty God ofiPers Himself to 
work in my heart, to do the work of keeping me; 
and I want to get linked with Omnipotence, or 
rather, linked to the Omnipotent One, to the living 
God, and to have my place in the hollow of His 
hand. You read the Psalms, and you think of the 
wonderful thoughts in many of the expressions that 
David uses; as, for instance, when he speaks about 
God being our God, our Fortress, our Refuge, our 
Strong Tower, our Strength, and our Salvation. 
David had very wonderful views of how the everlast- 
ing God is Himself the hiding=place of the believing 
soul, and of how He takes the believer and keeps 
him in the very hollow of His hand, in the secret of 
His pavilion, under the shadow of His wings, under 



KEPT BY THE POWER OF GOD 99 

His very feathers. And there David lived. And 
oh, we who are the children of Pentecost, we who 
have known Christ and His blood and the Holy 
Ghost sent down from heaven, why is it we know so 
little of what it is to walk tremblingly step by step 
with the Almighty God as our Keeper? 

Have you ever thought that in every action of 
grace in your heart you have the whole omnipotence 
of God engaged to bless you? When I come to a 
man and he bestows upon me a gift of money, I get 
it and go away with it. He has given me something 
of his; the rest he keeps for himself. But that is 
not the way with the power of God. God can part 
with nothing of His own power, and therefore I can 
experience the power and goodness of God only so 
far as I am in contact and fellowship with Himself; 
and when I come into contact and fellowship with 
Himself I come into contact and fellowship with the 
whole omnipotence of God, and have the omnipo- 
tence of God to help me every day. 

A son has, perhaps, a very rich father, and as the 
former is about to commence business the father 
says: "You can have as much money as you want 
for your undertaking." All the father has is at the 
disposal of the son. And that is the way with God, 
your Almighty God. You can hardly take it in; you 
feel yourself such a little worm. His omnipotence 
needed to keep a little worm! Yes, His omnipotence 
is needed to keep every little worm that lives in the 
dust, and also to keep the universe, and therefore 
His omnipotence is much more needed in keeping 
your soul and mine from the power of sin. 

Oh, if you want to grow in grace, do learn to be- 



100 KEPT BY THE POWER OF GOD 

gin here. In all your judgings and meditations and 
thoughts and deeds and questionings and studies and 
prayers, learn to be kept by your Almighty God. 
What is Almighty God not going to do for the child 
that trusts Him? The Bible says: "Above all that 
we can ask or think." It is Omnipotence you must 
learn to know and trust, and then you will live as a 
Christian ought to live. How little we have learned 
to study God, and to understand that a godly life is 
a life full of God, a life that loves God and waits on 
Him, and trusts Him, and allows Him to bless it! 
We cannot do the will of God except by the power 
of God. God gives us the first exx3erience of His 
power to prepare us to long for more, and to come 
and claim all that He can do. God help us to trust 
Him every day. 

Another thought. This keeping is not only alMn- 
clusive and omnipotent, but also 

CONTINUOUS AND UNBROKEN. 

People sometimes say: "For a week or a month 
God has kept me very wonderfully: I have lived in 
the light of His countenance, and I cannot say what 
joy I have not had in fellowship with Him. He has 
blessed me in my work for others. He has given me 
souls, and at times I felt as if I were carried heaven- 
wards on eagle wings. But it did not continue. It 
was too good; it could not last." And some say: 
" It was necessary that I should fall to keep me hum- 
ble." And others say: "I know it was my own 
fault; but somehow you cannot always live up in the 
heights." 

Oh beloved, why is it? Can there be any reason 



KEPT BY THE POWER OF GOD 101 

why the keeping of God should not be continuous 
and unbroken? Just think. All life is in unbroken 
continuity. If my life were stopped for half an hour 
I would be dead, and my life gone. Life is a contin- 
uous thing, and the life of God is the life of His 
Church, and the life of God is His almighty power 
working in us. And God comes to us as the Al- 
mighty One, and without any condition He offers to 
be my Keeper, and His keeping means that day by 
day, moment by moment, God is going to keep us. 

If I were to ask you the question: " Do you think 
God is able to keep you one day from actual trans- 
gression?" you would answer: "I not only know He 
is able to do it, but I think He has done it. There 
have been days in which He has kept my heart in 
His holy presence, when, though I have always had a 
sinful nature within me. He has kept me from con- 
scious, actual transgression." 

Now, if He can do that for an hour or a day, why 
not for two days? Oh! let us make God's omnipo- 
tence as revealed in His word the measure of our ex- 
pectations. Has God not said in His Word: *' I, the 
Lord, do keep it, and will water it every moment"? 
What can that mean? Does " every moment " mean 
every moment? Did God promise of that vineyard 
of red wine that every moment He would water it so 
that the heat of the sun and the scorching wind 
might never dry it up? Yes. In South Africa they 
sometimes make a graft, and above it they tie a bot- 
tle of water, so that now and then there shall be a 
drop to saturate what they have put about it. And so 
the moisture is kept there unceasingly until the graft 
has had time to strike, and resist the heat of the sun. 



102 KEPT BY THE POWER OF GOD 

Will our God, in His tender-hearted love towards 
us, not keep us every moment when He has promised 
to do so? Oh! if we once got hold of the thought: 
Our whole religious life is to be Grod's doing — " It is 
God that worketh in us to will and to do of His 
good pleasure " — when once we get faith to expect 
that from God, God wdll do all for us. 

The keeping is to be continuous. Every morning 
God will meet you as you wake. It is not a question: 
If I forgot to wake in the morning with the thought 
of Him, wdiat will come of it? If you trust your 
w^aking to God, God will meet you in the morning as 
you w^ake with His divine sunshine and love, and He 
will give you the consciousness that through the day 
you have got God to take charge of you continuously 
with His almighty power. And God will meet you 
the next day and every day; and never mind if in the 
practice of fellowship there comes failure sometimes. 
If you maintain your position and say: " Lord, I am 
going to expect Thee to do Thy utmost, and I am 
going to trust Thee day by day to keep me absolute- 
ly," your faith will grow stronger and stronger, and 
you will know the keeping power of God in unbro- 
kenness. 

II. 

And now the other side — Believing. "Kept by 
the power of God through faith. ''^ How must we look 
at this faith? 

Let me say, first of all, that this faith means 

UTTER IMPOTENCE AND HELPLESSNESS BEFORE GOD. 

At the bottom of all faith there is a feeling of help- 



KEPT BY THE POWER OF GOD 103 

lessness. If I have a bit of business to transact, per- 
haps to buy a house, the conveyancer must do the 
work of getting the transfer of the property in my 
name, and making all the arrangements. I cannot 
do that work, and in trusting that agent I confess I 
cannot do it. And so faith always means helplessness. 
In many cases it means : I can do it with a great deal 
of trouble, but another can do it better. But in most 
cases it is utter helplessness; another must do it for 
me. And that is the secret of the spiritual life. A 
man must learn to say: "I give up everything; I 
have tried and longed, and thought and prayed, but 
failure has come. God has blessed me and helped 
me, but still, in the long run, there has been so much 
of sin and sadness." What a change comes when a 
man is thus broken down into utter helplessness and 
self=despair, and says: " I can do nothing!" 

Remember Paul. He was living a blessed life, and 
he had been taken up into the third heaven, and then 
the thorn in the flesh came, " a messenger of Satan to 
buffet him." And what happened? Paul could not 
understand it, and he prayed the Lord three times to 
take it away; but the Lord said, in effect: 

"No; it is possible thou mightest exalt thyself, and 
therefore I have sent thee this trial to keep thee weak 
and humble." 

And Paul then learned a lesson that he never for- 
got, and that was — to rejoice in his infirmities. He 
said that the weaker he was the better it was for him, 
for w^hen he was weak he was strong in his Lord 
Christ. 

Do you want to enter what people call " the higher 
life "? Then go a step lower down. I remember Dr. 



lOi KEPT BY THE POWER OF GOD 

Boardman telling how that once he was invited by a 
gentleman to go and see some works where they 
made fine shot, and I believe the workmen did .'.o by 
pouring down molten lead from a great height. This 
gentlemam wanted to take Dr. Boardman up to the 
top of the tower to see how the work was done. The 
doctor came to the, tower, he entered by the door, and 
began going upstairs; but when he had gone a few 
steps the gentleman called out: 

" That is the wrong way. You must come down 
this way; that stair is locked up." 

The gentleman took him downstairs a good many 
steps, and there an elevator was ready to take him to 
the top; and he said: 

" I have learned a lesson that going down is often 
the best way to get up." 

Ah yes, God will have to bring us very low down; 
there will have to come upon us a sense of emptiness 
and despair and nothingness. It is when we sink 
down in utter helplessness that the everlasting God 
will reveal Himself in His power, and that our hearts 
will learn to trust God alone. 

What is it that keeps us from trusting Him per- 
fectly? 

Many a one says: "I believe what you say, but 
there is one difficulty. If my trust were perfect and 
always abiding, all would come right, for I know God 
will honor trust. But how am I to get that trust? " 

My answer is: ''By the death of self. The great 
hindrance to trust is self=effort. So long as you have 
got your own wisdom and thoughts and strength, 
you cannot fully trust God. But when God breaks 
you down, when everything begins to grow dim be- 



KEPT BY THE POWER OF GOD 105 

fore your eyes, and you see that you understand 
nothing, then God is coming nigh, and if you will 
bow 'down in nothingness and wait upon God, He 
will become all." 

As long as we are something, God cannot be all, 
and His omnipotence cannot do its full work, That 
is the beginning of faith — utter despair of self, a 
ceasing from man and everything on earth, and find- 
ing our hope in God alone. 

And then, next, we must understand that faith is 

REST. 

In the beginning of the faith-life, faith is strug- 
gling; but as long as faith is struggling, faith has 
not attained its strength. But when faith in its 
struggling gets to the end of itself, and just throws 
itself upon God and rests on Him, then comes joy 
and victory. 

Perhaps I can make it plainer if I tell the story 
of how the Keswick Convention began. Canon Bat- 
tersby was an evangelical clergyman of the Church of 
England for more than twenty years, a man of deep 
and tender godliness, but he had not the conscious- 
ness of rest and victory over sin, and often was deeply 
sad at the thought of stumbling and failure and sin. 
When he heard about the possibility of victory, he 
felt it was desirable, but it was as if he could not at- 
tain to it. On one occasion, he heard an address on 
" Rest and Faith, " from the story of the nobleman 
who came from Capernaum to Cana to ask Christ to 
heal his child. In the address it was shown that the 
nobleman believed that Christ could help him in a 
general way, but he came to Jesus a good deal by 



106 KEPT BY THE POWER OF GOD 

way of an experiment. He hoped Christ would help 
him, but he had not any assurance of that help. 
But what happened? When Christ said to him: 
" Go thy way, for thy child liveth, " that man be- 
lieved the word that Jesus spoke; he rested in that 
word. He had no proof that his child was well 
again, and he had to walk back seven hours' journey 
to Capernaum. He walked back, and on the way met 
his servant, and got the first news that the child was 
well, that at one o'clock on the afternoon of the pre- 
vious day, at the very time that Jesus spoke to him, 
the fever left the child. That father rested upon the 
word of Jesus and His work, and he went down to 
Capernaum and found his child well; and he praised 
God, and became with his whole house a believer and 
disciple of Jesus. 

Oh, friends, that is faith! When God comes to 
me with the promise of His keeping, and I have 
nothing on earth to trust in, I say to God: "Thy 
word is enough; kept by the power of God." That 
is faith, that is rest. 

When Canon Battersby heard that address, he 
went home that night, and in the darkness of the 
night found rest. He rested on the word of Jesus. 
And the next morning, in the streets of Oxford, he 
said to a friend: " I have found it! " Then he went 
and told others, and asked that the Keswick Conven- 
tion might be begun, and those at the Convention 
with himself should testify simply what God had 
done. 

It is a great thing when a man comes to rest on 
God's almighty power for every moment of his life, 
in prospect of temptations to temper and haste and 



KEPT BY THE POWER OF GOD 107 

anger and unlovingness and pride and sin. It is a 
great thing in prospect of these to enter into a cove- 
nant with the omnipotent Jehovah, not on account of 
anything that any man says, or of anything that my 
heart feels, but on the strength of the Word of God: 
" Kept by the povrer of God through faith. " 

Oh, let us say to God that we are going to prove 
Him to the very uttermost. Let us say: We ask 
Thee for nothing more than Thou canst give, but we 
want nothing less. Let us say: My God, let my 
life be a proof of what the omnipotent God can do, 
Let these be the two dispositions of our souls every 
day — deep helplessness, and simple, childlike rest. 

That brings me to just one more thought in regard 
to faith — faith implies 

FELLOWSHIP WITH GOD. 

Many people want to take the Word and believe 
that, and they find they cannot believe it. Ah no! 
you cannot separate God from His Word. No good- 
ness or power can be received separate from God, and 
if you want to get into this life of godliness you must 
take time for fellowship with God. 

People sometimes tell me: "My life is one of 
such scurry and bustle that I have no time for fellow- 
ship with God." A dear missionary said to me: 
"People do not know how we missionaries are 
tempted. I get up at five o'clock in the morning, 
and there are the natives waiting for their orders for 
work. Then I have to go to the school and spend 
hours there; and then there is other work, and six- 
teen hours rush along, and I hardly get time to be 
alone with God." 



108 KEPT BY THE POWER OF GOD 

Ah! there is the want. I pray you, remem- 
ber two things. I have not told you to trust the om- 
nipotence of God as a thing, and I have not told you 
to trust the Word of God as a w^ritten book, but I 
have told you to go to the God of omnipotence and 
the God of the Word. Deal with God as that noble- 
man dealt with the living Christ. Why was he able 
to believe the word that Christ spoke to him ? Because 
in the very eyes and tones and voice of Jesus, the Son 
of God, he saw and heard something which made 
him feel that he could trust Him. And that is what 
Christ can do for you and me. Do not try to stir 
and arouse faith from within. How often I have 
tried to do that, and made a fool of myself! You 
cannot stir up faith from the depths of your heart. 
Leave your heart, and look into the face of Christ, 
and listen to what He tells you about how He will 
keep you. Look up into the face of your loving 
Father, and take time every day with Him, and begin 
a new life with the deep emptiness and poverty of a 
man who has got nothing, and who wants to get every- 
thing from Him; with the deep restfulness of a man 
who rests on the living God, the omnipotent Jehovah ; 
and try God, and prove Him if He will not open the 
windows of heaven and pour out a blessing that there 
shall not be room to receive it. 

I close by asking if you are willing to experience 
to the very full the heavenly keeping for the heaven- 
ly inheritance? Kobert Murray M'Cheyne says, 
somewhere: " Oh, God, make me as holy as a par- 
doned sinner can be made." And if that prayer is in 
your heart, come now, and let us enter into a covenant 
with the everlasting and omnipotent Jehovah afresh, 



KEPT BY THE POWER OF GOD 109 

and in great helplessness, but in great restfulness, 
place ourselves in His hands. And then as we enter 
into our covenant, let us have the one prayer — that 
we may believe fully that the everlasting God is 
going to be our Companion, holding our hand every 
moment of the day; our Keeper, watching over us 
without a moment's interval; our Father, delighting 
to reveal Himself in our souls always. He has the 
power to let the sunshine of His love be with us all 
the day. Do not be afraid because you have got 
your business that you cannot have God with you 
always. Learn the lesson that the natural sun shines 
upon you all the day, and you enjoy its light, and 
wherever you are you have got the sun; God takes 
care that it shines upon you. And God will take 
care that His own divine light shines upon you, 
and that you shall abide in that light, if you will 
only trust Him for it. Let us trust God to do that 
with a great and entire trust. 

Here is the omnipotence of God, and here is faith 
reaching out to the measure of that omnipotence. 
Shall we not say: " All that that omnipotence can do, 
I am going to trust my God for " ? Are not the two 
sides of this heavenly life wonderful? God's omnip- 
otence covering me, and my will in its littleness 
resting in that omnipotence, and rejoicing in it! 

Moment by moment, I'm kept in His love; 
Moment by moment, I've life from above; 
Looking to Jesus, the glory doth shine; 
Moment by moment. Oh Lord, I am Thine! 



"YE ARE THE BRANCHES." 

AN ADDRESS TO CHRISTIAN WORKERS. 

Everything depends on our being right ourselves 
in Christ. If I want good apples, I must have a 
good apple=tree; and if I care for the health of the 
appleHree, the apj)le^tree will give me good apples. 
And it is just so with our Christian life and work. 
If our life ivUh Christ he right, all will come right. 
There may be the need of instruction and suggestion 
and help and training in the different departments 
of the work; all that has its value. But in the long 
run, the greatest essential is to have the full life in 
Christ; in other words, to have Christ in us, working 
through us. I know how much there is often to 
disturb us, or to cause anxious questionings; but the 
Master has such a blessing for every one of us, and 
such perfect peace and rest, and such joy and strength, 
if we can only come into, and be kept in, the right 
attitude towards Him. 

I will take my text from the parable of the Vine 
and the Branches, in John xv: 5: ''I am the vine, ye 
are the branches." Especially these words: "Ye are 
the branches." 

What a simple thing it is to be a branch, the 
branch of a tree, or the branch of a vine! The 
branch grows out of the vine, or out of the tree, and 
there it lives and grows, and in due time, bears fruit. 
It has no responsibility except just to receive from 

110 



" YE ARE THE BRANCHES'' 111 

the root and stem sap and nourishment. And if we 
only by the Holy Spirit knew our relationship to 
Jesus Christ, our work would be changed into the 
brightest and most heavenly thing upon earth. In- 
stead of there ever being soul^weariness or exhaustion, 
our work would be like a new experience, linking us 
to Jesus as nothing else can. For, alas! is it not 
often true that our work comes between us and 
Jesus? What folly! The very work that He has to 
do in me, and I for Him, I take up in such a way 
that it separates me from Christ. Many a laborer in 
the vineyard has complained that he has too much 
work, and not time for close communion with Jesus, 
and that his usual work weakens his inclination for 
prayer, and that his too much intercourse with men 
darkens the spiritual life. Sad thought, that the 
bearing of fruit should separate the branch from the 
vine! That must be because we have looked upon 
our work as something else than the branch bearing- 
fruit. May God deliver us from every false thought 
about the Christian life. 

Now, just a few thoughts about this blessed 

BKANCH^LIFE. 

In the first place, it is 

A LIFE OF ABSOLUTE DEPENDENCE. 

The branch has nothing; it just depends upon the 
vine for everything. That word ahsolnte dependence 
is one of the most solemn and large and precious of 
words. A great German theologian wrote two large 
volumes some years ago to show that the whole of 
Calvin's theology is summed up in that one principle 
of ahsolnte dependence upon God; and he was right. 



112 " YE ARE THE BRANCHES'' 

Another great writer has said that absolide, unalter- 
able dependence upon God alone is the essence of 
the religion of angels, and should be that of men also. 
God is everything to the angels, and He is willing to 
be everything to the Christian. If I can learn every 
moment of the day to depend upon God, everything 
will come right. You w^ill get the higher life if you 
depend absolutely upon God. 

Now, here we find it with the vine and the 
branches. Every vine you ever see, or every bunch 
of grapes that comes upon your table, let it remind 
you that the branch is absolutely dependent on the 
vine. The vine has to do the work, and the branch 
enjoys the fruit of it. 

What has the vine to do? It has to do a great 
work. It has to send its roots out into the soil and 
hunt under the ground — the roots often extend a 
long way out — for nourishment, and to drink in the 
moisture. Put certain elements of manure in certain 
directions, and the vine sends its roots there, and 
then in its roots or stems it turns the moisture and 
manure into that special sap which is to make the 
fruit that is borne. The vine does the work, and the 
branch has just to receive from the vine the sap, 
which is changed into grapes. I have been told that 
at Hamilton Court, London, there is a vine that some- 
times bore a couple of thousand bunches of grapes, 
and people were astonished at its large growth and 
rich fruitage. Afterwards it was discovered what 
was the cause of it. Not so very far away runs the 
Eiver Thames, and the vine had stretched its roots 
away hundreds of yards under the ground, until it 
had come to the river^side, and there in all the rich 



" YE ARE THE BRANCHES'' 113 

slime of the river=bed it had found rich nourishment, 
and obtained moisture, and the roots had drawn the 
sap all that distance up and up into the vine, and as 
a result there was the abundant and rich harvest. 
The vine had the work to do, and the branches had 
just to depend upon the vine, and receive what it 
gave. 

Is that literally true of my Lord Jesus? Must 
I understand that when I have to work, when I 
have to preach a sermon, or address a Bible class, or 
to go out and visit the i^oor neglected ones, that all 
the responsibility of the work is on Christ? 

That is exactly what Christ wants you to under- 
stand. Christ wants that in all your work, the very 
foundation should be the simple, blessed conscious- 
ness: Christ must care for all. 

And how docs He fulfil the trust of that depend- 
ence? He does it by sending down the Holy Spirit 
- — not now and then only as a special gift, for remem- 
ber the relation between the vine and the branches 
is such that hourly, daily, unceasingly there is the 
living connection maintained. The saj^ does not flow 
for a time, and then stop, and then flow again, but 
from moment to moment the sap flows from the vine 
to the branches. And just so, my Lord Jesus wants 
me to take that blessed position as a worker, and 
morning by morning and day by day and hour by 
hour and step by step, in every work I have to go out 
to, just to abide before Him in the simple utter help- 
lessness of one who knows nothing, and is nothing, 
and can do nothing. Oh, beloved workers, study that 
word nothing. You sometimes sing: '' Oh to be noth- 
ing, nothing"; but have you really studied that word, 



114 "YE ARE THE BRANCHES » 

and prayed every day, and worshiped God, in the 
light of it? Do you know the blessedness of that 
word nothing 9 

If I am something, then God is not everything; 
but when I become nothing, God can become all, and 
the everlasting God in Christ can reveal Himself 
fully. That is the higher life. We need to become 
nothing. Someone has well said that the seraphim 
and cherubim are flames of fire because they know 
they are nothing, and they allow God to put His 
fulness and His glory and brightness into them. 
They are nothing, and God is all in them and around 
them. Oh, become nothing in deep reality, and, as 
a worker, study only one thing — to become poorer 
and lower and more helpless, that Christ may work 
all in you. 

Workers, here is your first lesson : learn to be noth- 
ing, learn to be helpless. The man who has got 
something is not absolutely dependent; but the man 
who has got nothing is absolutely dependent. Abso- 
lute dependence upon God is the secret of all power 
in work. The branch has nothing but what it gets 
from the vine, and you and I can have nothing but 
what we get from Jesus. 

But secondly, the life of the branch is not only a 
life of entire dependence, but of 

DEEP EESTFULNESS. 

Oh that little branch, if it could think, and if it 
could feel, and if it could speak — that branch away 
in Hampton Court vine, or on some of the million 
vines that we have in South Africa, in our sunny land 
— if we could have a little branch here to-day to talk 



" YE ARE THE BRANCHES'' 115 

to US, and if v/e could say: "Come, branch of the 
vine, I want to learn from thee how I can l3e a true 
branch of the living Vine," w4iat would it answer? 
The little branch would whisper: 

" Man, I hear that you are wise, and I know that 
you can do a great many wonderful things. I know 
you have much strength and wisdom given to you, 
but I have one lesson for you. With all your hurry 
and effort in Christ's work you never prosper. The 
first thing you need is to come and rest in your Lord 
Jesus. That is what I do. Since I grew out of that 
vine I have spent years and years, and all I have 
done is just to rest in the vine. When the time of 
spring came I had no anxious thought or care. The 
vine began to pour its sap into me, and to give the 
bud and leaf. And when the time of summer came 
I had no care, and in the great heat I trusted the 
vine to bring moisture to keep me fresh. And in the 
time of harvest, when the owner came to pluck the 
grapes, I had no care. If there was anything in the 
grapes not good, the owner never blamed the branch; 
the blame was always on the vine. And if you would 
be a true branch of Christ, the living Vine, just rest 
on Him. Let Christ bear the responsibility." 
You say: " Won't that make me slothful? " 
I tell you it will not. No one who learns to rest up- 
on the living Christ can become slothful, for the clos- 
er your contact with Christ the more of the Spirit of 
His zeal and love will be borne in upon you. But oh, 
begin to w^ork in the midst of your entire dependence 
by adding to that dec}} restfulness. A man, some- 
times tries and tries to be dependent upon Christ, 
but he worries himself about this absolute depend- 



116 " YE ARE THE BRANCHES'' 

ence; he tries and he cannot get it. But let him 
sink down into entire restfulness every day. 

In Thy strong hand I lay me down. 

So shall the work be done; 
For who can work so wondrously 

As the Almighty One? 

Worker, take your place every day at the feet of 
Jesus, in the blessed peace and rest that come from 
the knowledge — 

I have no care, my cares are His; 

I have no fear, He cares for all my fears. 

Come, children of God, and understand that it is 
the Lord Jesus who wants to work through you. You 
complain of the want of fervent love. It will come 
from Jesus. He will give the divine love in your 
heart with which you can love people. That is the 
meaning of the assurance: "The love of God is shed 
abroad in our hearts by the Holy Spirit"; and of 
that other word: "The love of Christ constraineth 
us." Christ can give you a fountain of love, so that 
you cannot help loving the most wretched and the 
most ungrateful, or those who have wearied you hith- 
erto. Rest in Christ, who can give wisdom and 
strength, and you do not know how that restfulness 
will often prove to be the very best part of your mes- 
sage. You plead with people and you argue, and 
they get the idea: "There is a man arguing and 
striving with me." They only feel: "Here are two 
men dealing with each other." But it you will let 
the deep rest of God come over you, the rest in Christ 
Jesus, the peace and rest and holiness of heaven, that 
restfulness will bring a blessing to the heart, even 
more than the words you speak. 



" YE ARE THE BRANCHES'' 117 

But a third thought: The branch teaches a les- 
son of 

MUCH FRUITFULNESS. 

You know the Lord Jesus repeated that word fruit 
often in that parable. He spoke, first, of fruit, and 
then of more fruit, and then of much fruit. Yes, 
you are ordained not only to bear fruit, but to bear 
much fruit. " Herein is my Father glorified, thcd ye 
hear much fruit.'''' In the first place, Christ said: "I 
am the Vine, and my Father is the Husbandman. 
My Father is the Husbandman who has charge of me 
and you," He who will watch over the connection 
between Christ and the branches is God; and it is in 
the power of God through Christ we are to bear fruit. 
Oh Christians, you know this world is perishing for 
the want of workers. And it wants not only more 
workers. The workers are saying, some more earn- 
estly than others: " We need not only more workers, 
but we need that our workers should have a new 
power, a different life; that we workers should be 
able to bring more blessing." Children of God, I 
appeal to you. You know what trouble you take, say, 
in a case of sickness. You have a beloved friend 
apparently in danger of death, and nothing can re- 
fresh that friend so much as a few grapes, and they 
are out of season; but what trouble you will take to 
get the grapes that are to be the nourishment of this 
dying friend! And oh, there are around you people 
who never go to church, and so many who go to 
church, but do not know Christ. And yet the heavenly 
grapes, the grapes of Eshcol, the grapes of the heav- 
enly Vine, are not to be had at any price, except as 



118 " YE ARE THE BRANCHES " 

the child of God bears them out of his inner life in 
fellowship with Christ. Except the children of God 
are filled with the sap of the heavenly Vine, except 
they are filled with the Holy Spirit and the love of 
Jesus, they cannot bear much of the real heavenly 
grape. We all confess there is a great deal of work, 
a great deal of preaching and teaching and visiting, a 
great deal of machinery, a great deal of earnest ef- 
fort of every kind; but there is not much manifesta- 
tion of the power of God in it. 

What is wanting? There is wanting the close con- 
nection between the worker and the heavenly Vine. 
Christ, the heavenly Vine, has blessings that He 
could pour on tens of thousands who are perishing. 
Christ, the heavenly Vine, has power to provide the 
heavenly grapes. But " Ye are the branches," and 
you cannot bear heavenly fruit unless you are in close 
connection with Jesus Christ. 

Do not confound loork and fruit . There may be a 
good deal of work for Christ that is not the fruit of 
the heavenly Vine, Do not seek for work only. 
Oh! study this question of fruit=bearing. It means 
tlie very life and the very power and the very spirit 
and the very love within the heart of the Son of God 
— it means the heavenly Vine Himself coming into 
your heart and mine. 

You know there are different sorts of grapes, each 
with a different name, and every vine provides exact- 
ly that peculiar aroma and juice which gives the 
grape its particular flavor and taste. Just so, there is 
in the heart of Christ Jesus a life, and a love, and a 
Spirit, and a blessing, and a power for men, that are 



" YE ARE THE BFANCHES'' 119 

entirely heavenly and divine, and that will come 
down into our hearts. Stand in close connection 
with the heavenly Vine and say: 

" Lord Jesus, nothing less than the sap that flows 
through Thyself, nothing less than the Spirit of Thy 
divine life is what we ask. Lord Jesus, I pray Thee 
let Thy Spirit flow through me in all my work for 
Thee." 

I tell you again that the sap of the heavenly Vine 
is nothing but the Holy Spirit. The Holy Spirit is 
the life of the heavenly Vine, and what you must get 
from Christ is nothing less than a strong inflow of 
the Holy Spirit. You need it exceedingly, and you 
want nothing more than that. Remember that. Do 
not expect Christ to give a bit of strength here, and 
a bit of blessing yonder, and a bit of help over there. 
As the vine does its work in giving its own peculiar 
sap to the branch, so expect Christ to give His own 
Holy Spirit into your heart, and then you will bear 
much fruit. And if you have only begun to bear 
fruit, and are listening to the word of Christ in the 
parable, '' more fruit," " much fruit," remember that 
in order that you should bear more fruit you just re- 
quire more of Jesus in your life and heart. 

We ministers of the gospel, how we are in danger 
of getting into a condition of icorl^, tvoj^k, ivork! And 
we pray over it, but the freshness and buoyancy and 
joy of the heavenly life are not always present. Let 
us seek to understand that the life of the branch is a 
life of much fruit, because it is a life rooted in 
Christ, the living, heavenly Vine. 

A fourth thought: The life of the branch is 



120 " YE ARE THE BRANCHES'' 



A LIFE OF CLOSE COMMUNION. 

Let US again ask: What has the branch to do? 
You know that precious inexhaustible word that 
Christ used: Abide. Your life is to be an abiding 
life. And how is the abiding to be? It is to be just 
like the branch in the vine, abiding every minute of 
the day. There are the branches, in close commun- 
ion, in unbroken communion, with the vine, from 
January to December. And cannot I live every day 
— it is to me an almost terrible thing that we should 
ask the question — cannot I live in abiding commun- 
ion with the heavenly Vine? 

You say: " But I am so much occupied with other 
things " 

You may have ten hours' hard work daily, during 
which your brain has to be occupied with temporal 
things; God orders it so. But the abiding work is 
the work of the heart, not of the brain, the work of 
the heart clinging to and resting in Jesus, a work in 
which the Holy Spirit links us to Christ Jesus. Oh, 
do believe that deeper down than the brain, deep 
down in the inner life, you can abide in Christ, so 
that every moment you are free the consciousness 
will come: 

" Blessed Jesus, I am still in Thee." 

If you will learn for a time to put aside other work 
and to get into this abiding contact with the heavenly 
Vine, you will find that fruit will come. 

What is the application to our life of this abiding 
communion? What does it mean? 

It means close felloicship tvith Christ in secret 
prayer. I am sure there are Christians who do long 



« YE ARE THE BRANCHES''' 121 

for the higher life, and who soraetimes have got a 
great blessing, and have at times found a great inflow 
of heavenly joy and a great outflow of heavenly glad- 
ness; and yet after a time it has passed away. They 
have not understood that close personal actual com- 
munion with Christ is an absolute necessity for daily 
life. Take time to be alone with Christ. Nothing in 
heaven or earth can free you from the necessity for 
that, if you are to be happy and holy Christians. 

Oh! how many Christians look upon it as a burden 
and a tax, and a duty, and a difiiculty to get much 
alone with God! That is the great hindrance to our 
Christian life everywhere. We want more quiet fel- 
lowship with God, and I tell you in the name of the 
heavenly Vine that you cannot be healthy branches, 
branches into which the heavenly saj) can flow, unless 
you take plenty of time for communion with God. If 
you are not willing to sacrifice time to get alone with 
Him, and to give Him time every day to work in you, 
and to keep up the link of connection between you 
and Himself, He cannot give you that blessing of 
His unbroken fellowship. Jesus Christ asks you to 
live in close communion with Him. Let every heart 
say: "Oh Christ, it is this I long for, it is this I 
choose." And He will gladly give it you. 

And then my last thought: The life of the branch 
is 

A LIFE OF ABSOLUTE SUREENDEK. 

This word, absolute surrender, is a great and 
solemn word, and I believe we do not understand its 
meaning. But yet the little branch preaches it. 

" Have you anything to do, little branch, besides 
bearing grapes?" 



122 ''YE ARE THE BRANCHES" 

" No, nothing.^'' 

" Are you fit for nothing? " 

Fit for nothing! The Bible says that a bit of vine 
cannot even be used as a pen; it is fit for nothing but 
to be burned. 

" And now, what do you understand, little branch, 
about your relation to the vine? " 

"My relation is just this: I am utterly given up to 
the vine, and the vine can give me as much or as 
little sap as it chooses. Here I am at its disposal 
and the vine can do with me what it likes." 

Oh, friends, we want this absolute surrender to the 
Lord Jesus Christ. The more I speak the more I 
feel that this is one of the most difiicult points to 
make clear, and one of the most important and need- 
ful points to explain — what this absolute surrender is. 
It is often an easy thing for a man or a number of 
men to come out and offer themselves up to God for 
entire consecration, and to say: " Lord, it is my desire 
to give up myself entirely to Thee." That is of great 
value, and often brings very rich blessing. But the 
one question I ought to study quietly is: 

WHAT IS MEANT BY ABSOLUTE SURRENDER? 

It means that just as literally as Christ was given up 
entirely to God, I am given up entirely to Christ. Is 
that too strong? Some think so. Some think that 
never can be; that just as entirely and absolutely as 
Christ gave up His life to do nothing but seek the 
Father's pleasure, and depend on the Father absolute- 
ly and entirely, I am to do nothing but to seek the 
pleasure of Christ. But that is actually true. Christ 
Jesus came to breathe ' His own Spirit into us, to 



" YE ARE THE BRANCHES'' 123 

make us find our very highest happiness in living en- 
tirely for God, just as He did. Oh, beloved brethren, 
if that is the case, then I ought to siy: 

" Yes, as true as it is of that little branch of the 
vine, so true, by God's grace, I would liave it be of 
me. I would live day by day Ihat Christ may be 
able to do with me what He will." 

Ah! here comes the terrible mistake that lies at the 
bottom of so much of our own religion. A man 
thinks : 

" I have my business and family duties, and my 
relations as a citizen, and all this I cannot change. 
And now alongside all this I am to take in religion 
and the service of God, as something that will keep 
me from sin. God help me to perform my duties 
properly!" 

That is not right. When Christ came, He came 
and bought the sinner with His blood. If there was 
a slavennarket here and I were to buy a slave, I 
should take that slave away to my own house from 
his old surroundings, and he would live at my house 
as my personal property, and I could order him about 
all the day. And if he were a faithful slave, he would 
live as having no will and no interests of his own, his 
one care being to promote the welhbeing and honor 
of his master. And in like manner I, who have been 
bought with the blood of Christ, have been bought to 
live every day with the one thought — How can I 
please my Master? 

Oh, w^e find the Christian life so difiicult because 
we seek for God's blessing while we live in our own 
will. We should be glad to live the Christian life 
according to our own liking. We make our own 



124 " YE ARE THE BRANCHES'' 

plans and choose our own work, and then we ask the 
Lord Jesus to come in and take care that sin shall 
not conquer us too much, and that we shall not go too 
far wrong; we ask Him to come in and give us so 
much of His blessing. But our relation to Jesus 
ought to be such that we are entirely at His disposal, 
and every day come to Him humbly and straightfor- 
wardly and say: 

" Lord, is there anything in me that is not accord- 
ing to Thy will, that has not been ordered by Thee, 
or that is not entirely given up to Thee?" 

Oh, if we would wait and wait patiently, I tell you 
what the result would be. There would spring up a re- 
lationship between us and Christ so close and so tender 
that we should afterwards be amazed at hov/ we for- 
merly could have lived with the idea: "I am surren- 
dered to Christ." We should feel how far distant 
our intercourse with Him had previously been, and 
that He can, and does indeed, come and take actual 
possession of us, and gives unbroken fellowship all 
the day. The branch calls us to absolute surrender. 

I do not speak now so much about the giving up of 
sins. There are people who need that, people who 
have got violent tempers, bad habits, and actual sins 
which they from time to time commit, and which 
they have never given up into the very bosom of the 
Lamb of God. I pray you, if you are branches of the 
living Vine, do not keep one sin back. I know there 
are a great many difficulties about this question of 
holiness, I know that all do not think exactly the 
same with regard to it. That would be to me a mat- 
ter of comparative indifference if I could see that all 
are honestly longing to be free from every sin. But 



♦• YE ARE THE BRANCHES" 125 

I am afraid that unconsciously there are in hearts 
often compromises with the idea that we cannot be 
without sin, we must sin a little every day; we cannot 
help it. Oh that people would actually cry to God: 
"Lord, do keep me from sin!" Give yourself ut- 
terly to Jesus, and ask Him to do His very utmost 
for you in keeping you from sin. 

There is a great deal in our work, in our Church 
and our surroundings that we found in the world 
when we were born into it, and it has grown all round 
us, and we think that it is all right, it cannot be 
changed. We do not come to the Lord Jesus and 
ask Him about it. Oh! I advise you. Christians, 
hri7ig everything into relationsJiip with Jesus and 
say: 

"Lord, everything in my life has to be in most 
comiDlete harmony with my position as a branch of 
Thee, the blessed Vine." 

Let your surrender to Christ be absolute. I do not 
understand that word surrender fully; it gets new 
meanings every now and then; it enlarges immensely 
from time to time. But I advise you to speak it out: 
"Absolute surrender to Thee, O Christ, is what I 
have chosen." And Christ will show you what is not 
according to His mind, and lead you on to deeper 
and higher blessedness. 

In conclusion, let me gather up all in one word. 
Christ Jesus said: "I am the Vine, ye are the 
branches." Li other words: "I, the living One who 
have so completely given myself to you, am the Vine. 
You cannot trust me too much. I am the Al- 
mighty Worker, full of a divine life and power." 
You are the branches of the Lord Jesus Christ. If 



126 *' YE ARE THE BRANCHES" 

there is in your heart the consciousness that you are 
not a strong, healthy, fruit-bearing branch, not 
closely linked with Jesus, not living in Him as 
you should be — then listen to Him saying: " I am 
the Vine, I will receive you, I will draw you to my- 
self, I will bless you, I will strengthen you, I will 
fill you with my Spirit. I, the Vine, have taken you 
to be my branches, I have given myself utterly to 
you; children, give yourselves utterly to me. I have 
surrendered myself as God absolutely to you, I be- 
came man and died for you that I might be entirely 
yours. Come and surrender yourselves entirely to be 
mine." 

What shall our answer be? Oh, let it be a prayer 
from the depths of our heart, that the living Christ 
may take each one of us and link us close to Him- 
self. Let our prayer be that He, the living Vine, 
shall so link each of us to Himself that we shall go 
away with our hearts singing: '• He is my Vine, and 
I am His branch, — I want nothing more, — now I 
have the everlasting Vine." Then, when you get 
alone with Him, worship and adore Him, praise and 
trust Him, love Him and wait for His love. " Thou 
art my Vine, and I am Thy branch. It is enough, 
my soul is satisfied." 

Glory to His blessed name ! 



BY REV. F. B. MEYER 

'■^Few books of recent years are better adapted to instruct and 
help Christians than those of this author. He is a man "mighty in 
the Scriptures.'' "— D. L. Moody. 

THE CHRISTIAN LIFE SERIES 

8 vols., each, 50 cents; white cloth, each, 60 cents 
Through Fire and Flood. 
The Glorious Lord. 
Calvary to Pentecost. 
Key "Words of the Inner Life. 
The Future Tenses of the Blessed Life. 
The Present Tenses of the Blessed Life. 
Christian Living. 
The Shepherd Psalm. 

OLD TESTAMENT HEROES....Each $1.00 

David: Shepherd, Psalmist, King. 
Jeremiah: Priest and Prophet. 
Joshua, and the Land of Promise. 
Abraham; or. The Obedience of Faith, 
Elijah and the Secret of His Power. 
Israel: A Prince with God. 
Joseph: Beloved — Hated — Exalted. 
Moses, the Servant of God. 

THE EXPOSITORY SERI ES...Each $1.00 

Christ in Isaiah. 

The "Way into the Holiest. An Exposition of Hebrews. 
The Life and Light of Men. Expositions in John. 
Tried by Fire. Exposition of the first Epistle of Peter. 

The Shepherd Psalm. Presentation edition. i2mo, boxed, 

$1.25; gilt edges, $1.50. 
Light on Lifers Duties. Paper, 15 cents; cloth, 30 cents. 
The Secret of Guidance. Paper, 15 cents; cloth, 30 cents. 
The BeUs of Isj or, Echoes from my early pastorates. 

With portrait. i2mo, cloth, 75 cents. 
Prayers for Heart and Home. Morning and Evening 

Devotions for a Month. 8vo, flexible cloth, 75 cents. 
The Psahns: Notes and Readings. i8mo, 60 cents. 
Envelope Series of Booklets. 20 cents per dozen, or $1.50 

per 100. Titles as follows: 
Peace, Perfect Peace Young Men, Don't Drift 

The Secret of Power The Lost Chord Found 

With Christ in Separation How to Read Your Bible 

Seven Rules for Daily Living The Secret of Guidance 

The Secret of Victory over Sin The Blessed Dead 

The First Step into the Blessed Life Burdens, and what to do with them 
Words of Help for Christian Girls In the Secret of His Presence 
The Filling of the Holy Spirit Why Sign the Pledge? 

Where Am I Wrong? The Chambers of the King 

The Stewardship of Money Not Eradication 

The Secret of Christ's Indwelling A K«swick Experience 
How to Bear Sorrow Comfort to be Comforted 

The Trivial Round the Oommon Task 



New Works 

By D. L* Moody 

The Ovetcomin§f Life. i6mo, cloth, 30c. 
Cheap edition, paper, 15c. Just issued. 

Contents, The Overcoming Life: Part I, The 
Christian's Warfare; Part II, Internal Foes; Part III, 
External Foes; Results of True Repentance; True 
Wisdom; Humility; Rest; Seven "I Wills" of Christ. 

Sowingf and Reaping* i2mo, cloth, 30c. 
Cheap paper edition, 15c. 38th thousand. 

Mr. Moody's most telling- sermon bore this title and 
in response to repeated demand it has been elaborated 
and is now published in its present form for the first 
time. Helpful and sug-g-estive, it is hoped the written 
addresses will carry all the force, and be fully as use- 
ful as when spoken. 

Pleasure and Profit in Bible Study* i2mo, 

cloth, 30c. Cheap paper edition, 15c. 58th 
thousand. 

"This little book appears to be the quintessence of 
all his teaching-s, the double distilled result of his ex- 
perience." — The Evangelist, New Tork. 

Notes from My Bible, from Genesis to 
Revelation. A reproduction of the marginal 
notes, hints, helps and suggestions from the 
author's Bible. 8th edition. i2mo, cloth, %\. 

Earlier Works by Mr* Moody* 

The Way to God and How to Find It 

To the Work I To the Work I 

Twelve Select Sermons 

Prevailing Prayer — What Hinders It? 

Bible Characters 

Heaven and How to Get There 

Sovereign Grace 

Secret Power; or, The Work of the Holy Spirit 

Each, cloth^ 30 cts.; cheap paper edition, ij cts. 



Theological Seminary-Speer Library 



1 1012 01099 9979 



I 



